Graphs and Iterative Processing
In “Graph-Like Data Models” on page 49 we discussed using graphs for modeling
data, and using graph query languages to traverse the edges and vertices in a graph.
The discussion in Chapter 2 was focused around OLTP-style use: quickly executing
queries to find a small number of vertices matching certain criteria.
It is also interesting to look at graphs in a batch processing context, where the goal is
to perform some kind of offline processing or analysis on an entire graph. This need
often arises in machine learning applications such as recommendation engines, or in
ranking systems. For example, one of the most famous graph analysis algorithms is
PageRank [69], which tries to estimate the popularity of a web page based on what
other web pages link to it. It is used as part of the formula that determines the order
in which web search engines present their results.
Dataflow engines like Spark, Flink, and Tez (see “Materialization of
Intermediate State” on page 419) typically arrange the operators in
a job as a directed acyclic graph (DAG). This is not the same as
graph processing: in dataflow engines, the flow of data from one
operator to another  is structured as a graph, while the data itself
typically consists of relational-style tuples. In graph processing, the
data itself  has the form of a graph. Another unfortunate naming
confusion!
Many graph algorithms are expressed by traversing one edge at a time, joining one
vertex with an adjacent vertex in order to propagate some information, and repeating
until some condition is met—for example, until there are no more edges to follow, or
until some metric converges. We saw an example in Figure 2-6, which made a list of
all the locations in North America contained in a database by repeatedly following
edges indicating which location is within which other location (this kind of algorithm
is called a transitive closure).
It is possible to store a graph in a distributed filesystem (in files containing lists of
vertices and edges), but this idea of “repeating until done” cannot be expressed in
plain MapReduce, since it only performs a single pass over the data. This kind of
algorithm is thus often implemented in an iterative style:
1. An external scheduler runs a batch process to calculate one step of the algorithm.
2. When the batch process completes, the scheduler checks whether it has finished
(based on the completion condition—e.g., there are no more edges to follow, or
the change compared to the last iteration is below some threshold).
3. If it has not yet finished, the scheduler goes back to step 1 and runs another
round of the batch process.
424 | Chapter 10: Batch Processing

This approach works, but implementing it with MapReduce is often very inefficient,
because MapReduce does not account for the iterative nature of the algorithm: it will
always read the entire input dataset and produce a completely new output dataset,
even if only a small part of the graph has changed compared to the last iteration.
The Pregel processing model
As an optimization for batch processing graphs, the bulk synchronous parallel  (BSP)
model of computation [70] has become popular. Among others, it is implemented by
Apache Giraph [ 37], Spark’s GraphX API, and Flink’s Gelly API [ 71]. It is also
known as the Pregel model, as Google’s Pregel paper popularized this approach for
processing graphs [72].
Recall that in MapReduce, mappers conceptually “send a message” to a particular call
of the reducer because the framework collects together all the mapper outputs with
the same key. A similar idea is behind Pregel: one vertex can “send a message” to
another vertex, and typically those messages are sent along the edges in a graph.
In each iteration, a function is called for each vertex, passing it all the messages that
were sent to it—much like a call to the reducer. The difference from MapReduce is
that in the Pregel model, a vertex remembers its state in memory from one iteration
to the next, so the function only needs to process new incoming messages. If no mes‐
sages are being sent in some part of the graph, no work needs to be done.
It’s a bit similar to the actor model (see “Distributed actor frameworks” on page 138 ),
if you think of each vertex as an actor, except that vertex state and messages between
vertices are fault-tolerant and durable, and communication proceeds in fixed rounds:
at every iteration, the framework delivers all messages sent in the previous iteration.
Actors normally have no such timing guarantee.
Fault tolerance
The fact that vertices can only communicate by message passing (not by querying
each other directly) helps improve the performance of Pregel jobs, since messages can
be batched and there is less waiting for communication. The only waiting is between
iterations: since the Pregel model guarantees that all messages sent in one iteration
are delivered in the next iteration, the prior iteration must completely finish, and all
of its messages must be copied over the network, before the next one can start.
Even though the underlying network may drop, duplicate, or arbitrarily delay mes‐
sages (see “Unreliable Networks” on page 277), Pregel implementations guarantee
that messages are processed exactly once at their destination vertex in the following
iteration. Like MapReduce, the framework transparently recovers from faults in
order to simplify the programming model for algorithms on top of Pregel.
Beyond MapReduce | 425

This fault tolerance is achieved by periodically checkpointing the state of all vertices
at the end of an iteration—i.e., writing their full state to durable storage. If a node
fails and its in-memory state is lost, the simplest solution is to roll back the entire
graph computation to the last checkpoint and restart the computation. If the algo‐
rithm is deterministic and messages are logged, it is also possible to selectively
recover only the partition that was lost (like we previously discussed for dataflow
engines) [72].
Parallel execution
A vertex does not need to know on which physical machine it is executing; when it
sends messages to other vertices, it simply sends them to a vertex ID. It is up to the
framework to partition the graph—i.e., to decide which vertex runs on which
machine, and how to route messages over the network so that they end up in the
right place.
Because the programming model deals with just one vertex at a time (sometimes
called “thinking like a vertex”), the framework may partition the graph in arbitrary
ways. Ideally it would be partitioned such that vertices are colocated on the same
machine if they need to communicate a lot. However, finding such an optimized par‐
titioning is hard—in practice, the graph is often simply partitioned by an arbitrarily
assigned vertex ID, making no attempt to group related vertices together.
As a result, graph algorithms often have a lot of cross-machine communication over‐
head, and the intermediate state (messages sent between nodes) is often bigger than
the original graph. The overhead of sending messages over the network can signifi‐
cantly slow down distributed graph algorithms.
For this reason, if your graph can fit in memory on a single computer, it’s quite likely
that a single-machine (maybe even single-threaded) algorithm will outperform a dis‐
tributed batch process [73, 74]. Even if the graph is bigger than memory, it can fit on
the disks of a single computer, single-machine processing using a framework such as
GraphChi is a viable option [ 75]. If the graph is too big to fit on a single machine, a
distributed approach such as Pregel is unavoidable; efficiently parallelizing graph
algorithms is an area of ongoing research [76]. 
High-Level APIs and Languages
Over the years since MapReduce first became popular, the execution engines for dis‐
tributed batch processing have matured. By now, the infrastructure has become
robust enough to store and process many petabytes of data on clusters of over 10,000
machines. As the problem of physically operating batch processes at such scale has
been considered more or less solved, attention has turned to other areas: improving
the programming model, improving the efficiency of processing, and broadening the
set of problems that these technologies can solve.
426 | Chapter 10: Batch Processing

As discussed previously, higher-level languages and APIs such as Hive, Pig, Cascad‐
ing, and Crunch became popular because programming MapReduce jobs by hand is
quite laborious. As Tez emerged, these high-level languages had the additional bene‐
fit of being able to move to the new dataflow execution engine without the need to
rewrite job code. Spark and Flink also include their own high-level dataflow APIs,
often taking inspiration from FlumeJava [34].
These dataflow APIs generally use relational-style building blocks to express a com‐
putation: joining datasets on the value of some field; grouping tuples by key; filtering
by some condition; and aggregating tuples by counting, summing, or other functions.
Internally, these operations are implemented using the various join and grouping
algorithms that we discussed earlier in this chapter.
Besides the obvious advantage of requiring less code, these high-level interfaces also
allow interactive use, in which you write analysis code incrementally in a shell and
run it frequently to observe what it is doing. This style of development is very helpful
when exploring a dataset and experimenting with approaches for processing it. It is
also reminiscent of the Unix philosophy, which we discussed in “The Unix Philoso‐
phy” on page 394 .
Moreover, these high-level interfaces not only make the humans using the system
more productive, but they also improve the job execution efficiency at a machine
level.
The move toward declarative query languages
An advantage of specifying joins as relational operators, compared to spelling out the
code that performs the join, is that the framework can analyze the properties of the
join inputs and automatically decide which of the aforementioned join algorithms
would be most suitable for the task at hand. Hive, Spark, and Flink have cost-based
query optimizers that can do this, and even change the order of joins so that the
amount of intermediate state is minimized [66, 77, 78, 79].
The choice of join algorithm can make a big difference to the performance of a batch
job, and it is nice not to have to understand and remember all the various join algo‐
rithms we discussed in this chapter. This is possible if joins are specified in a declara‐
tive way: the application simply states which joins are required, and the query
optimizer decides how they can best be executed. We previously came across this idea
in “Query Languages for Data” on page 42 .
However, in other ways, MapReduce and its dataflow successors are very different
from the fully declarative query model of SQL. MapReduce was built around the idea
of function callbacks: for each record or group of records, a user-defined function
(the mapper or reducer) is called, and that function is free to call arbitrary code in
order to decide what to output. This approach has the advantage that you can draw
Beyond MapReduce | 427

upon a large ecosystem of existing libraries to do things like parsing, natural language
analysis, image analysis, and running numerical or statistical algorithms.
The freedom to easily run arbitrary code is what has long distinguished batch pro‐
cessing systems of MapReduce heritage from MPP databases (see “Comparing
Hadoop to Distributed Databases” on page 414); although databases have facilities
for writing user-defined functions, they are often cumbersome to use and not well
integrated with the package managers and dependency management systems that are
widely used in most programming languages (such as Maven for Java, npm for Java‐
Script, and Rubygems for Ruby).
However, dataflow engines have found that there are also advantages to incorporat‐
ing more declarative features in areas besides joins. For example, if a callback func‐
tion contains only a simple filtering condition, or it just selects some fields from a
record, then there is significant CPU overhead in calling the function on every
record. If such simple filtering and mapping operations are expressed in a declarative
way, the query optimizer can take advantage of column-oriented storage layouts (see
“Column-Oriented Storage” on page 95) and read only the required columns from
disk. Hive, Spark DataFrames, and Impala also use vectorized execution (see “Mem‐
ory bandwidth and vectorized processing” on page 99): iterating over data in a tight
inner loop that is friendly to CPU caches, and avoiding function calls. Spark gener‐
ates JVM bytecode [ 79] and Impala uses LLVM to generate native code for these
inner loops [41].
By incorporating declarative aspects in their high-level APIs, and having query opti‐
mizers that can take advantage of them during execution, batch processing frame‐
works begin to look more like MPP databases (and can achieve comparable
performance). At the same time, by having the extensibility of being able to run arbi‐
trary code and read data in arbitrary formats, they retain their flexibility advantage.
Specialization for different domains
While the extensibility of being able to run arbitrary code is useful, there are also
many common cases where standard processing patterns keep reoccurring, and so it
is worth having reusable implementations of the common building blocks. Tradition‐
ally, MPP databases have served the needs of business intelligence analysts and busi‐
ness reporting, but that is just one among many domains in which batch processing
is used.
Another domain of increasing importance is statistical and numerical algorithms,
which are needed for machine learning applications such as classification and recom‐
mendation systems. Reusable implementations are emerging: for example, Mahout
implements various algorithms for machine learning on top of MapReduce, Spark,
and Flink, while MADlib implements similar functionality inside a relational MPP
database (Apache HAWQ) [54].
428 | Chapter 10: Batch Processing

Also useful are spatial algorithms such as k-nearest neighbors [80], which searches for
items that are close to a given item in some multi-dimensional space—a kind of simi‐
larity search. Approximate search is also important for genome analysis algorithms,
which need to find strings that are similar but not identical [81].
Batch processing engines are being used for distributed execution of algorithms from
an increasingly wide range of domains. As batch processing systems gain built-in
functionality and high-level declarative operators, and as MPP databases become
more programmable and flexible, the two are beginning to look more alike: in the
end, they are all just systems for storing and processing data. 
Summary
In this chapter we explored the topic of batch processing. We started by looking at
Unix tools such as awk, grep, and sort, and we saw how the design philosophy of
those tools is carried forward into MapReduce and more recent dataflow engines.
Some of those design principles are that inputs are immutable, outputs are intended
to become the input to another (as yet unknown) program, and complex problems
are solved by composing small tools that “do one thing well.”
In the Unix world, the uniform interface that allows one program to be composed
with another is files and pipes; in MapReduce, that interface is a distributed filesys‐
tem. We saw that dataflow engines add their own pipe-like data transport mecha‐
nisms to avoid materializing intermediate state to the distributed filesystem, but the
initial input and final output of a job is still usually HDFS.
The two main problems that distributed batch processing frameworks need to solve
are:
Partitioning
In MapReduce, mappers are partitioned according to input file blocks. The out‐
put of mappers is repartitioned, sorted, and merged into a configurable number
of reducer partitions. The purpose of this process is to bring all the related data—
e.g., all the records with the same key—together in the same place.
Post-MapReduce dataflow engines try to avoid sorting unless it is required, but
they otherwise take a broadly similar approach to partitioning.
Fault tolerance
MapReduce frequently writes to disk, which makes it easy to recover from an
individual failed task without restarting the entire job but slows down execution
in the failure-free case. Dataflow engines perform less materialization of inter‐
mediate state and keep more in memory, which means that they need to recom‐
pute more data if a node fails. Deterministic operators reduce the amount of data
that needs to be recomputed.
Summary | 429

We discussed several join algorithms for MapReduce, most of which are also inter‐
nally used in MPP databases and dataflow engines. They also provide a good illustra‐
tion of how partitioned algorithms work:
Sort-merge joins
Each of the inputs being joined goes through a mapper that extracts the join key.
By partitioning, sorting, and merging, all the records with the same key end up
going to the same call of the reducer. This function can then output the joined
records.
Broadcast hash joins
One of the two join inputs is small, so it is not partitioned and it can be entirely
loaded into a hash table. Thus, you can start a mapper for each partition of the
large join input, load the hash table for the small input into each mapper, and
then scan over the large input one record at a time, querying the hash table for
each record.
Partitioned hash joins
If the two join inputs are partitioned in the same way (using the same key, same
hash function, and same number of partitions), then the hash table approach can
be used independently for each partition.
Distributed batch processing engines have a deliberately restricted programming
model: callback functions (such as mappers and reducers) are assumed to be stateless
and to have no externally visible side effects besides their designated output. This
restriction allows the framework to hide some of the hard distributed systems prob‐
lems behind its abstraction: in the face of crashes and network issues, tasks can be
retried safely, and the output from any failed tasks is discarded. If several tasks for a
partition succeed, only one of them actually makes its output visible.
Thanks to the framework, your code in a batch processing job does not need to worry
about implementing fault-tolerance mechanisms: the framework can guarantee that
the final output of a job is the same as if no faults had occurred, even though in real‐
ity various tasks perhaps had to be retried. These reliable semantics are much stron‐
ger than what you usually have in online services that handle user requests and that
write to databases as a side effect of processing a request.
The distinguishing feature of a batch processing job is that it reads some input data
and produces some output data, without modifying the input—in other words, the
output is derived from the input. Crucially, the input data is bounded: it has a known,
fixed size (for example, it consists of a set of log files at some point in time, or a snap‐
shot of a database’s contents). Because it is bounded, a job knows when it has finished
reading the entire input, and so a job eventually completes when it is done.
In the next chapter, we will turn to stream processing, in which the input is unboun‐
ded—that is, you still have a job, but its inputs are never-ending streams of data. In
430 | Chapter 10: Batch Processing

this case, a job is never complete, because at any time there may still be more work
coming in. We shall see that stream and batch processing are similar in some
respects, but the assumption of unbounded streams also changes a lot about how we
build systems. 
References
[1] Jeffrey Dean and Sanjay Ghemawat: “ MapReduce: Simplified Data Processing on
Large Clusters,” at 6th USENIX Symposium on Operating System Design and Imple‐
mentation (OSDI), December 2004.
[2] Joel Spolsky: “ The Perils of JavaSchools,” joelonsoftware.com, December 25, 2005.
[3] Shivnath Babu and Herodotos Herodotou: “ Massively Parallel Databases and
MapReduce Systems ,” Foundations and Trends in Databases , volume 5, number 1,
pages 1–104, November 2013. doi:10.1561/1900000036
[4] David J. DeWitt and Michael Stonebraker: “ MapReduce: A Major Step Back‐
wards,” originally published at databasecolumn.vertica.com, January 17, 2008.
[5] Henry Robinson: “ The Elephant Was a Trojan Horse: On the Death of Map-
Reduce at Google,” the-paper-trail.org, June 25, 2014.
[6] “ The Hollerith Machine,” United States Census Bureau, census.gov.
[7] “ IBM 82, 83, and 84 Sorters Reference Manual ,” Edition A24-1034-1, Interna‐
tional Business Machines Corporation, July 1962.
[8] Adam Drake: “ Command-Line Tools Can Be 235x Faster than Your Hadoop
Cluster,” aadrake.com, January 25, 2014.
[9] “ GNU Coreutils 8.23 Documentation,” Free Software Foundation, Inc., 2014.
[10] Martin Kleppmann: “ Kafka, Samza, and the Unix Philosophy of Distributed
Data,” martin.kleppmann.com, August 5, 2015.
[11] Doug McIlroy: Internal Bell Labs memo , October 1964. Cited in: Dennis M.
Richie: “ Advice from Doug McIlroy,” cm.bell-labs.com.
[12] M. D. McIlroy, E. N. Pinson, and B. A. Tague: “ UNIX Time-Sharing System:
Foreword,” The Bell System Technical Journal , volume 57, number 6, pages 1899–
1904, July 1978.
[13] Eric S. Raymond: The Art of UNIX Programming . Addison-Wesley, 2003. ISBN:
978-0-13-142901-7
[14] Ronald Duncan: “ Text File Formats – ASCII Delimited Text – Not CSV or TAB
Delimited Text,” ronaldduncan.wordpress.com, October 31, 2009.
[15] Alan Kay: “ Is ‘Software Engineering’ an Oxymoron? ,” tinlizzie.org.
Summary | 431

[16] Martin Fowler: “ InversionOfControl,” martinfowler.com, June 26, 2005.
[17] Daniel J. Bernstein: “ Two File Descriptors for Sockets,” cr.yp.to.
[18] Rob Pike and Dennis M. Ritchie: “ The Styx Architecture for Distributed Sys‐
tems,” Bell Labs Technical Journal, volume 4, number 2, pages 146–152, April 1999.
[19] Sanjay Ghemawat, Howard Gobioff, and Shun-Tak Leung: “ The Google File Sys‐
tem,” at 19th ACM Symposium on Operating Systems Principles  (SOSP), October
2003. doi:10.1145/945445.945450
[20] Michael Ovsiannikov, Silvius Rus, Damian Reeves, et al.: “ The Quantcast File
System,” Proceedings of the VLDB Endowment , volume 6, number 11, pages 1092–
1101, August 2013. doi:10.14778/2536222.2536234
[21] “ OpenStack Swift 2.6.1 Developer Documentation ,” OpenStack Foundation,
docs.openstack.org, March 2016.
[22] Zhe Zhang, Andrew Wang, Kai Zheng, et al.: “ Introduction to HDFS Erasure
Coding in Apache Hadoop,” blog.cloudera.com, September 23, 2015.
[23] Peter Cnudde: “ Hadoop Turns 10,” yahoohadoop.tumblr.com, February 5, 2016.
[24] Eric Baldeschwieler: “ Thinking About the HDFS vs. Other Storage Technolo‐
gies,” hortonworks.com, July 25, 2012.
[25] Brendan Gregg: “ Manta: Unix Meets Map Reduce,” dtrace.org, June 25, 2013.
[26] Tom White: Hadoop: The Definitive Guide , 4th edition. O’Reilly Media, 2015.
ISBN: 978-1-491-90163-2
[27] Jim N. Gray: “ Distributed Computing Economics ,” Microsoft Research Tech
Report MSR-TR-2003-24, March 2003.
[28] Márton Trencséni: “ Luigi vs Airflow vs Pinball ,” bytepawn.com, February 6,
2016.
[29] Roshan Sumbaly, Jay Kreps, and Sam Shah: “ The ‘Big Data’ Ecosystem at
LinkedIn,” at ACM International Conference on Management of Data  (SIGMOD),
July 2013. doi:10.1145/2463676.2463707
[30] Alan F. Gates, Olga Natkovich, Shubham Chopra, et al.: “ Building a High-Level
Dataflow System on Top of Map-Reduce: The Pig Experience ,” at 35th International
Conference on Very Large Data Bases (VLDB), August 2009.
[31] Ashish Thusoo, Joydeep Sen Sarma, Namit Jain, et al.: “ Hive – A Petabyte Scale
Data Warehouse Using Hadoop ,” at 26th IEEE International Conference on Data
Engineering (ICDE), March 2010. doi:10.1109/ICDE.2010.5447738
[32] “ Cascading 3.0 User Guide,” Concurrent, Inc., docs.cascading.org, January 2016.
432 | Chapter 10: Batch Processing

[33] “ Apache Crunch User Guide,” Apache Software Foundation, crunch.apache.org.
[34] Craig Chambers, Ashish Raniwala, Frances Perry, et al.: “ FlumeJava: Easy, Effi‐
cient Data-Parallel Pipelines ,” at 31st ACM SIGPLAN Conference on Programming
Language Design and Implementation  (PLDI), June 2010. doi:
10.1145/1806596.1806638
[35] Jay Kreps: “ Why Local State is a Fundamental Primitive in Stream Processing ,”
oreilly.com, July 31, 2014.
[36] Martin Kleppmann: “ Rethinking Caching in Web Apps ,” martin.klepp‐
mann.com, October 1, 2012.
[37] Mark Grover, Ted Malaska, Jonathan Seidman, and Gwen Shapira: Hadoop
Application Architectures. O’Reilly Media, 2015. ISBN: 978-1-491-90004-8
[38] Philippe Ajoux, Nathan Bronson, Sanjeev Kumar, et al.: “ Challenges to Adopting
Stronger Consistency at Scale ,” at 15th USENIX Workshop on Hot Topics in Operat‐
ing Systems (HotOS), May 2015.
[39] Sriranjan Manjunath: “ Skewed Join,” wiki.apache.org, 2009.
[40] David J. DeWitt, Jeffrey F. Naughton, Donovan A. Schneider, and S. Seshadri:
“ Practical Skew Handling in Parallel Joins ,” at 18th International Conference on Very
Large Data Bases (VLDB), August 1992.
[41] Marcel Kornacker, Alexander Behm, Victor Bittorf, et al.: “ Impala: A Modern,
Open-Source SQL Engine for Hadoop ,” at 7th Biennial Conference on Innovative
Data Systems Research (CIDR), January 2015.
[42] Matthieu Monsch: “ Open-Sourcing PalDB, a Lightweight Companion for Stor‐
ing Side Data,” engineering.linkedin.com, October 26, 2015.
[43] Daniel Peng and Frank Dabek: “ Large-Scale Incremental Processing Using Dis‐
tributed Transactions and Notifications,” at 9th USENIX conference on Operating Sys‐
tems Design and Implementation (OSDI), October 2010.
[44] “ “Cloudera Search User Guide,”  Cloudera, Inc., September 2015.
[45] Lili Wu, Sam Shah, Sean Choi, et al.: “ The Browsemaps: Collaborative Filtering
at LinkedIn ,” at 6th Workshop on Recommender Systems and the Social Web
(RSWeb), October 2014.
[46] Roshan Sumbaly, Jay Kreps, Lei Gao, et al.: “ Serving Large-Scale Batch Compu‐
ted Data with Project Voldemort ,” at 10th USENIX Conference on File and Storage
Technologies (FAST), February 2012.
[47] Varun Sharma: “ Open-Sourcing Terrapin: A Serving System for Batch Gener‐
ated Data,” engineering.pinterest.com, September 14, 2015.
Summary | 433

[48] Nathan Marz: “ ElephantDB,” slideshare.net, May 30, 2011.
[49] Jean-Daniel (JD) Cryans: “ How-to: Use HBase Bulk Loading, and Why ,”
blog.cloudera.com, September 27, 2013.
[50] Nathan Marz: “ How to Beat the CAP Theorem ,” nathanmarz.com, October 13,
2011.
[51] Molly Bartlett Dishman and Martin Fowler: “ Agile Architecture ,” at O’Reilly
Software Architecture Conference, March 2015.
[52] David J. DeWitt and Jim N. Gray: “ Parallel Database Systems: The Future of
High Performance Database Systems ,” Communications of the ACM , volume 35,
number 6, pages 85–98, June 1992. doi:10.1145/129888.129894
[53] Jay Kreps: “ But the multi-tenancy thing is actually really really hard ,” tweet‐
storm, twitter.com, October 31, 2014.
[54] Jeffrey Cohen, Brian Dolan, Mark Dunlap, et al.: “ MAD Skills: New Analysis
Practices for Big Data ,” Proceedings of the VLDB Endowment , volume 2, number 2,
pages 1481–1492, August 2009. doi:10.14778/1687553.1687576
[55] Ignacio Terrizzano, Peter Schwarz, Mary Roth, and John E. Colino: “ Data Wran‐
gling: The Challenging Journey from the Wild to the Lake ,” at 7th Biennial Confer‐
ence on Innovative Data Systems Research (CIDR), January 2015.
[56] Paige Roberts: “ To Schema on Read or to Schema on Write, That Is the Hadoop
Data Lake Question,” adaptivesystemsinc.com, July 2, 2015.
[57] Bobby Johnson and Joseph Adler: “ The Sushi Principle: Raw Data Is Better ,” at
Strata+Hadoop World, February 2015.
[58] Vinod Kumar Vavilapalli, Arun C. Murthy, Chris Douglas, et al.: “ Apache
Hadoop YARN: Yet Another Resource Negotiator ,” at 4th ACM Symposium on
Cloud Computing (SoCC), October 2013. doi:10.1145/2523616.2523633
[59] Abhishek Verma, Luis Pedrosa, Madhukar Korupolu, et al.: “ Large-Scale Cluster
Management at Google with Borg ,” at 10th European Conference on Computer Sys‐
tems (EuroSys), April 2015. doi:10.1145/2741948.2741964
[60] Malte Schwarzkopf: “ The Evolution of Cluster Scheduler Architectures ,” firma‐
ment.io, March 9, 2016.
[61] Matei Zaharia, Mosharaf Chowdhury, Tathagata Das, et al.: “ Resilient Dis‐
tributed Datasets: A Fault-Tolerant Abstraction for In-Memory Cluster Computing ,”
at 9th USENIX Symposium on Networked Systems Design and Implementation
(NSDI), April 2012.
[62] Holden Karau, Andy Konwinski, Patrick Wendell, and Matei Zaharia: Learning
Spark. O’Reilly Media, 2015. ISBN: 978-1-449-35904-1
434 | Chapter 10: Batch Processing

[63] Bikas Saha and Hitesh Shah: “ Apache Tez: Accelerating Hadoop Query Process‐
ing,” at Hadoop Summit, June 2014.
[64] Bikas Saha, Hitesh Shah, Siddharth Seth, et al.: “ Apache Tez: A Unifying Frame‐
work for Modeling and Building Data Processing Applications ,” at ACM Interna‐
tional Conference on Management of Data  (SIGMOD), June 2015. doi:
10.1145/2723372.2742790
[65] Kostas Tzoumas: “ Apache Flink: API, Runtime, and Project Roadmap ,” slide‐
share.net, January 14, 2015.
[66] Alexander Alexandrov, Rico Bergmann, Stephan Ewen, et al.: “ The Stratosphere
Platform for Big Data Analytics ,” The VLDB Journal , volume 23, number 6, pages
939–964, May 2014. doi:10.1007/s00778-014-0357-y
[67] Michael Isard, Mihai Budiu, Yuan Yu, et al.: “ Dryad: Distributed Data-Parallel
Programs from Sequential Building Blocks ,” at European Conference on Computer
Systems (EuroSys), March 2007. doi:10.1145/1272996.1273005
[68] Daniel Warneke and Odej Kao: “ Nephele: Efficient Parallel Data Processing in
the Cloud,” at 2nd Workshop on Many-Task Computing on Grids and Supercomputers
(MTAGS), November 2009. doi:10.1145/1646468.1646476
[69] Lawrence Page, Sergey Brin, Rajeev Motwani, and Terry Winograd: “ The
PageRank Citation Ranking: Bringing Order to the Web ,” Stanford InfoLab Techni‐
cal Report 422, 1999.
[70] Leslie G. Valiant: “ A Bridging Model for Parallel Computation ,” Communica‐
tions of the ACM , volume 33, number 8, pages 103–111, August 1990. doi:
10.1145/79173.79181
[71] Stephan Ewen, Kostas Tzoumas, Moritz Kaufmann, and Volker Markl: “ Spin‐
ning Fast Iterative Data Flows ,” Proceedings of the VLDB Endowment , volume 5,
number 11, pages 1268-1279, July 2012. doi:10.14778/2350229.2350245
[72] Grzegorz Malewicz, Matthew H. Austern, Aart J. C. Bik, et al.: “ Pregel: A System
for Large-Scale Graph Processing,” at ACM International Conference on Management
of Data (SIGMOD), June 2010. doi:10.1145/1807167.1807184
[73] Frank McSherry, Michael Isard, and Derek G. Murray: “ Scalability! But at What
COST?,” at 15th USENIX Workshop on Hot Topics in Operating Systems  (HotOS),
May 2015.
[74] Ionel Gog, Malte Schwarzkopf, Natacha Crooks, et al.: “ Musketeer: All for One,
One for All in Data Processing Systems ,” at 10th European Conference on Computer
Systems (EuroSys), April 2015. doi:10.1145/2741948.2741968
Summary | 435

[75] Aapo Kyrola, Guy Blelloch, and Carlos Guestrin: “ GraphChi: Large-Scale Graph
Computation on Just a PC ,” at 10th USENIX Symposium on Operating Systems
Design and Implementation (OSDI), October 2012.
[76] Andrew Lenharth, Donald Nguyen, and Keshav Pingali: “ Parallel Graph Analyt‐
ics,” Communications of the ACM, volume 59, number 5, pages 78–87, May 2016. doi:
10.1145/2901919
[77] Fabian Hüske: “ Peeking into Apache Flink’s Engine Room ,” flink.apache.org,
March 13, 2015.
[78] Mostafa Mokhtar: “ Hive 0.14 Cost Based Optimizer (CBO) Technical Over‐
view,” hortonworks.com, March 2, 2015.
[79] Michael Armbrust, Reynold S Xin, Cheng Lian, et al.: “ Spark SQL: Relational
Data Processing in Spark,” at ACM International Conference on Management of Data
(SIGMOD), June 2015. doi:10.1145/2723372.2742797
[80] Daniel Blazevski: “ Planting Quadtrees for Apache Flink ,” insightdataengineer‐
ing.com, March 25, 2016.
[81] Tom White: “ Genome Analysis Toolkit: Now Using Apache Spark for Data Pro‐
cessing,” blog.cloudera.com, April 6, 2016.
436 | Chapter 10: Batch Processing

CHAPTER 11
Stream Processing
A complex system that works is invariably found to have evolved from a simple system that
works. The inverse proposition also appears to be true: A complex system designed from
scratch never works and cannot be made to work.
—John Gall, Systemantics (1975)
In Chapter 10 we discussed batch processing—techniques that read a set of files as
input and produce a new set of output files. The output is a form of derived data; that
is, a dataset that can be recreated by running the batch process again if necessary. We
saw how this simple but powerful idea can be used to create search indexes, recom‐
mendation systems, analytics, and more.
However, one big assumption remained throughout Chapter 10 : namely, that the
input is bounded—i.e., of a known and finite size—so the batch process knows when
it has finished reading its input. For example, the sorting operation that is central to
MapReduce must read its entire input before it can start producing output: it could
happen that the very last input record is the one with the lowest key, and thus needs
to be the very first output record, so starting the output early is not an option.
In reality, a lot of data is unbounded because it arrives gradually over time: your users
produced data yesterday and today, and they will continue to produce more data
tomorrow. Unless you go out of business, this process never ends, and so the dataset
is never “complete” in any meaningful way [ 1]. Thus, batch processors must artifi‐
cially divide the data into chunks of fixed duration: for example, processing a day’s
worth of data at the end of every day, or processing an hour’s worth of data at the end
of every hour.
The problem with daily batch processes is that changes in the input are only reflected
in the output a day later, which is too slow for many impatient users. To reduce the
delay, we can run the processing more frequently—say, processing a second’s worth
of data at the end of every second—or even continuously, abandoning the fixed time
439

slices entirely and simply processing every event as it happens. That is the idea
behind stream processing.
In general, a “stream” refers to data that is incrementally made available over time.
The concept appears in many places: in the stdin and stdout of Unix, programming
languages (lazy lists) [2], filesystem APIs (such as Java’s FileInputStream), TCP con‐
nections, delivering audio and video over the internet, and so on.
In this chapter we will look at event streams as a data management mechanism: the
unbounded, incrementally processed counterpart to the batch data we saw in the
last chapter. We will first discuss how streams are represented, stored, and transmit‐
ted over a network. In “Databases and Streams” on page 451 we will investigate
the relationship between streams and databases. And finally, in “Processing Streams”
on page 464 we will explore approaches and tools for processing those streams
continually, and ways that they can be used to build applications.
Transmitting Event Streams
In the batch processing world, the inputs and outputs of a job are files (perhaps on a
distributed filesystem). What does the streaming equivalent look like?
When the input is a file (a sequence of bytes), the first processing step is usually to
parse it into a sequence of records. In a stream processing context, a record is more
commonly known as an event, but it is essentially the same thing: a small, self-
contained, immutable object containing the details of something that happened at
some point in time. An event usually contains a timestamp indicating when it hap‐
pened according to a time-of-day clock (see “Monotonic Versus Time-of-Day
Clocks” on page 288 ).
For example, the thing that happened might be an action that a user took, such as
viewing a page or making a purchase. It might also originate from a machine, such as
a periodic measurement from a temperature sensor, or a CPU utilization metric. In
the example of “Batch Processing with Unix Tools”  on page 391, each line of the web
server log is an event.
An event may be encoded as a text string, or JSON, or perhaps in some binary form,
as discussed in Chapter 4. This encoding allows you to store an event, for example by
appending it to a file, inserting it into a relational table, or writing it to a document
database. It also allows you to send the event over the network to another node in
order to process it.
In batch processing, a file is written once and then potentially read by multiple jobs.
Analogously, in streaming terminology, an event is generated once by a producer
(also known as a publisher or sender), and then potentially processed by multiple con‐
sumers (subscribers or recipients) [ 3]. In a filesystem, a filename identifies a set of
440 | Chapter 11: Stream Processing

related records; in a streaming system, related events are usually grouped together
into a topic or stream.
In principle, a file or database is sufficient to connect producers and consumers: a
producer writes every event that it generates to the datastore, and each consumer
periodically polls the datastore to check for events that have appeared since it last ran.
This is essentially what a batch process does when it processes a day’s worth of data at
the end of every day.
However, when moving toward continual processing with low delays, polling
becomes expensive if the datastore is not designed for this kind of usage. The more
often you poll, the lower the percentage of requests that return new events, and thus
the higher the overheads become. Instead, it is better for consumers to be notified
when new events appear.
Databases have traditionally not supported this kind of notification mechanism very
well: relational databases commonly have triggers, which can react to a change (e.g., a
row being inserted into a table), but they are very limited in what they can do and
have been somewhat of an afterthought in database design [ 4, 5]. Instead, specialized
tools have been developed for the purpose of delivering event notifications.
Messaging Systems
A common approach for notifying consumers about new events is to use a messaging
system: a producer sends a message containing the event, which is then pushed to
consumers. We touched on these systems previously in “Message-Passing Dataflow”
on page 136, but we will now go into more detail.
A direct communication channel like a Unix pipe or TCP connection between pro‐
ducer and consumer would be a simple way of implementing a messaging system.
However, most messaging systems expand on this basic model. In particular, Unix
pipes and TCP connect exactly one sender with one recipient, whereas a messaging
system allows multiple producer nodes to send messages to the same topic and allows
multiple consumer nodes to receive messages in a topic.
Within this publish/subscribe model, different systems take a wide range of
approaches, and there is no one right answer for all purposes. To differentiate the
systems, it is particularly helpful to ask the following two questions:
1. What happens if the producers send messages faster than the consumers can pro‐
cess them? Broadly speaking, there are three options: the system can drop mes‐
sages, buffer messages in a queue, or apply backpressure (also known as flow
control; i.e., blocking the producer from sending more messages). For example,
Unix pipes and TCP use backpressure: they have a small fixed-size buffer, and if
Transmitting Event Streams | 441

it fills up, the sender is blocked until the recipient takes data out of the buffer (see
“Network congestion and queueing” on page 282 ).
If messages are buffered in a queue, it is important to understand what happens
as that queue grows. Does the system crash if the queue no longer fits in mem‐
ory, or does it write messages to disk? If so, how does the disk access affect the
performance of the messaging system [6]?
2. What happens if nodes crash or temporarily go offline—are any messages lost?  As
with databases, durability may require some combination of writing to disk
and/or replication (see the sidebar “Replication and Durability” on page 227),
which has a cost. If you can afford to sometimes lose messages, you can probably
get higher throughput and lower latency on the same hardware.
Whether message loss is acceptable depends very much on the application. For exam‐
ple, with sensor readings and metrics that are transmitted periodically, an occasional
missing data point is perhaps not important, since an updated value will be sent a
short time later anyway. However, beware that if a large number of messages are
dropped, it may not be immediately apparent that the metrics are incorrect [7]. If you
are counting events, it is more important that they are delivered reliably, since every
lost message means incorrect counters.
A nice property of the batch processing systems we explored in Chapter 10  is that
they provide a strong reliability guarantee: failed tasks are automatically retried, and
partial output from failed tasks is automatically discarded. This means the output is
the same as if no failures had occurred, which helps simplify the programming
model. Later in this chapter we will examine how we can provide similar guarantees
in a streaming context.
Direct messaging from producers to consumers
A number of messaging systems use direct network communication between produc‐
ers and consumers without going via intermediary nodes:
• UDP multicast is widely used in the financial industry for streams such as stock
market feeds, where low latency is important [ 8]. Although UDP itself is unrelia‐
ble, application-level protocols can recover lost packets (the producer must
remember packets it has sent so that it can retransmit them on demand).
• Brokerless messaging libraries such as ZeroMQ [ 9] and nanomsg take a similar
approach, implementing publish/subscribe messaging over TCP or IP multicast.
• StatsD [10] and Brubeck [7] use unreliable UDP messaging for collecting metrics
from all machines on the network and monitoring them. (In the StatsD protocol,
counter metrics are only correct if all messages are received; using UDP makes
the metrics at best approximate [11]. See also “TCP Versus UDP” on page 283 .)
442 | Chapter 11: Stream Processing

• If the consumer exposes a service on the network, producers can make a direct
HTTP or RPC request (see “Dataflow Through Services: REST and RPC” on page
131) to push messages to the consumer. This is the idea behind webhooks [ 12], a
pattern in which a callback URL of one service is registered with another service,
and it makes a request to that URL whenever an event occurs.
Although these direct messaging systems work well in the situations for which they
are designed, they generally require the application code to be aware of the possibility
of message loss. The faults they can tolerate are quite limited: even if the protocols
detect and retransmit packets that are lost in the network, they generally assume that
producers and consumers are constantly online.
If a consumer is offline, it may miss messages that were sent while it is unreachable.
Some protocols allow the producer to retry failed message deliveries, but this
approach may break down if the producer crashes, losing the buffer of messages that
it was supposed to retry.
Message brokers
A widely used alternative is to send messages via a message broker (also known as a
message queue), which is essentially a kind of database that is optimized for handling
message streams [ 13]. It runs as a server, with producers and consumers connecting
to it as clients. Producers write messages to the broker, and consumers receive them
by reading them from the broker.
By centralizing the data in the broker, these systems can more easily tolerate clients
that come and go (connect, disconnect, and crash), and the question of durability is
moved to the broker instead. Some message brokers only keep messages in memory,
while others (depending on configuration) write them to disk so that they are not lost
in case of a broker crash. Faced with slow consumers, they generally allow unboun‐
ded queueing (as opposed to dropping messages or backpressure), although this
choice may also depend on the configuration.
A consequence of queueing is also that consumers are generally asynchronous: when
a producer sends a message, it normally only waits for the broker to confirm that it
has buffered the message and does not wait for the message to be processed by con‐
sumers. The delivery to consumers will happen at some undetermined future point in
time—often within a fraction of a second, but sometimes significantly later if there is
a queue backlog.
Message brokers compared to databases
Some message brokers can even participate in two-phase commit protocols using XA
or JTA (see “Distributed Transactions in Practice” on page 360). This feature makes
Transmitting Event Streams | 443

them quite similar in nature to databases, although there are still important practical
differences between message brokers and databases:
• Databases usually keep data until it is explicitly deleted, whereas most message
brokers automatically delete a message when it has been successfully delivered to
its consumers. Such message brokers are not suitable for long-term data storage.
• Since they quickly delete messages, most message brokers assume that their
working set is fairly small—i.e., the queues are short. If the broker needs to buffer
a lot of messages because the consumers are slow (perhaps spilling messages to
disk if they no longer fit in memory), each individual message takes longer to
process, and the overall throughput may degrade [6].
• Databases often support secondary indexes and various ways of searching for
data, while message brokers often support some way of subscribing to a subset of
topics matching some pattern. The mechanisms are different, but both are essen‐
tially ways for a client to select the portion of the data that it wants to know
about.
• When querying a database, the result is typically based on a point-in-time snap‐
shot of the data; if another client subsequently writes something to the database
that changes the query result, the first client does not find out that its prior result
is now outdated (unless it repeats the query, or polls for changes). By contrast,
message brokers do not support arbitrary queries, but they do notify clients when
data changes (i.e., when new messages become available).
This is the traditional view of message brokers, which is encapsulated in standards
like JMS [ 14] and AMQP [ 15] and implemented in software like RabbitMQ,
ActiveMQ, HornetQ, Qpid, TIBCO Enterprise Message Service, IBM MQ, Azure Ser‐
vice Bus, and Google Cloud Pub/Sub [16].
Multiple consumers
When multiple consumers read messages in the same topic, two main patterns of
messaging are used, as illustrated in Figure 11-1:
Load balancing
Each message is delivered to one of the consumers, so the consumers can share
the work of processing the messages in the topic. The broker may assign mes‐
sages to consumers arbitrarily. This pattern is useful when the messages are
expensive to process, and so you want to be able to add consumers to parallelize
the processing. (In AMQP, you can implement load balancing by having multi‐
ple clients consuming from the same queue, and in JMS it is called a shared
subscription.)
444 | Chapter 11: Stream Processing

Fan-out
Each message is delivered to all of the consumers. Fan-out allows several inde‐
pendent consumers to each “tune in” to the same broadcast of messages, without
affecting each other—the streaming equivalent of having several different batch
jobs that read the same input file. (This feature is provided by topic subscriptions
in JMS, and exchange bindings in AMQP.)
Figure 11-1. (a) Load balancing: sharing the work of consuming a topic among con‐
sumers; (b) fan-out: delivering each message to multiple consumers.
The two patterns can be combined: for example, two separate groups of consumers
may each subscribe to a topic, such that each group collectively receives all messages,
but within each group only one of the nodes receives each message.
Acknowledgments and redelivery
Consumers may crash at any time, so it could happen that a broker delivers a mes‐
sage to a consumer but the consumer never processes it, or only partially processes it
before crashing. In order to ensure that the message is not lost, message brokers use
acknowledgments: a client must explicitly tell the broker when it has finished process‐
ing a message so that the broker can remove it from the queue.
If the connection to a client is closed or times out without the broker receiving an
acknowledgment, it assumes that the message was not processed, and therefore it
delivers the message again to another consumer. (Note that it could happen that the
message actually was fully processed, but the acknowledgment was lost in the net‐
work. Handling this case requires an atomic commit protocol, as discussed in “Dis‐
tributed Transactions in Practice” on page 360 .)
Transmitting Event Streams | 445

When combined with load balancing, this redelivery behavior has an interesting
effect on the ordering of messages. In Figure 11-2, the consumers generally process
messages in the order they were sent by producers. However, consumer 2 crashes
while processing message m3, at the same time as consumer 1 is processing message
m4. The unacknowledged message m3 is subsequently redelivered to consumer 1,
with the result that consumer 1 processes messages in the order m4, m3, m5. Thus,
m3 and m4 are not delivered in the same order as they were sent by producer 1.
Figure 11-2. Consumer 2 crashes while processing m3, so it is redelivered to consumer 1
at a later time.
Even if the message broker otherwise tries to preserve the order of messages (as
required by both the JMS and AMQP standards), the combination of load balancing
with redelivery inevitably leads to messages being reordered. To avoid this issue, you
can use a separate queue per consumer (i.e., not use the load balancing feature). Mes‐
sage reordering is not a problem if messages are completely independent of each
other, but it can be important if there are causal dependencies between messages, as
we shall see later in the chapter. 
Partitioned Logs
Sending a packet over a network or making a request to a network service is normally
a transient operation that leaves no permanent trace. Although it is possible to record
it permanently (using packet capture and logging), we normally don’t think of it that
way. Even message brokers that durably write messages to disk quickly delete them
again after they have been delivered to consumers, because they are built around a
transient messaging mindset.
446 | Chapter 11: Stream Processing

Databases and filesystems take the opposite approach: everything that is written to a
database or file is normally expected to be permanently recorded, at least until some‐
one explicitly chooses to delete it again.
This difference in mindset has a big impact on how derived data is created. A key
feature of batch processes, as discussed in Chapter 10 , is that you can run them
repeatedly, experimenting with the processing steps, without risk of damaging the
input (since the input is read-only). This is not the case with AMQP/JMS-style mes‐
saging: receiving a message is destructive if the acknowledgment causes it to be
deleted from the broker, so you cannot run the same consumer again and expect to
get the same result.
If you add a new consumer to a messaging system, it typically only starts receiving
messages sent after the time it was registered; any prior messages are already gone
and cannot be recovered. Contrast this with files and databases, where you can add a
new client at any time, and it can read data written arbitrarily far in the past (as long
as it has not been explicitly overwritten or deleted by the application).
Why can we not have a hybrid, combining the durable storage approach of databases
with the low-latency notification facilities of messaging? This is the idea behind log-
based message brokers.
Using logs for message storage
A log is simply an append-only sequence of records on disk. We previously discussed
logs in the context of log-structured storage engines and write-ahead logs in Chap‐
ter 3, and in the context of replication in Chapter 5.
The same structure can be used to implement a message broker: a producer sends a
message by appending it to the end of the log, and a consumer receives messages by
reading the log sequentially. If a consumer reaches the end of the log, it waits for a
notification that a new message has been appended. The Unix tool tail -f, which
watches a file for data being appended, essentially works like this.
In order to scale to higher throughput than a single disk can offer, the log can be
partitioned (in the sense of Chapter 6). Different partitions can then be hosted on dif‐
ferent machines, making each partition a separate log that can be read and written
independently from other partitions. A topic can then be defined as a group of parti‐
tions that all carry messages of the same type. This approach is illustrated in
Figure 11-3.
Within each partition, the broker assigns a monotonically increasing sequence num‐
ber, or offset, to every message (in Figure 11-3, the numbers in boxes are message off‐
sets). Such a sequence number makes sense because a partition is append-only, so the
messages within a partition are totally ordered. There is no ordering guarantee across
different partitions.
Transmitting Event Streams | 447

Figure 11-3. Producers send messages by appending them to a topic-partition file, and
consumers read these files sequentially.
Apache Kafka [ 17, 18], Amazon Kinesis Streams [ 19], and Twitter’s DistributedLog
[20, 21] are log-based message brokers that work like this. Google Cloud Pub/Sub is
architecturally similar but exposes a JMS-style API rather than a log abstraction [ 16].
Even though these message brokers write all messages to disk, they are able to achieve
throughput of millions of messages per second by partitioning across multiple
machines, and fault tolerance by replicating messages [22, 23].
Logs compared to traditional messaging
The log-based approach trivially supports fan-out messaging, because several con‐
sumers can independently read the log without affecting each other—reading a mes‐
sage does not delete it from the log. To achieve load balancing across a group of
consumers, instead of assigning individual messages to consumer clients, the broker
can assign entire partitions to nodes in the consumer group.
Each client then consumes all the messages in the partitions it has been assigned.
Typically, when a consumer has been assigned a log partition, it reads the messages in
the partition sequentially, in a straightforward single-threaded manner. This coarse-
grained load balancing approach has some downsides:
448 | Chapter 11: Stream Processing

i. It’s possible to create a load balancing scheme in which two consumers share the work of processing a par‐
tition by having both read the full set of messages, but one of them only considers messages with even-
numbered offsets while the other deals with the odd-numbered offsets. Alternatively, you could spread
message processing over a thread pool, but that approach complicates consumer offset management. In gen‐
eral, single-threaded processing of a partition is preferable, and parallelism can be increased by using more
partitions.
• The number of nodes sharing the work of consuming a topic can be at most the
number of log partitions in that topic, because messages within the same parti‐
tion are delivered to the same node.i
• If a single message is slow to process, it holds up the processing of subsequent
messages in that partition (a form of head-of-line blocking; see “Describing Per‐
formance” on page 13 ).
Thus, in situations where messages may be expensive to process and you want to par‐
allelize processing on a message-by-message basis, and where message ordering is not
so important, the JMS/AMQP style of message broker is preferable. On the other
hand, in situations with high message throughput, where each message is fast to pro‐
cess and where message ordering is important, the log-based approach works very
well.
Consumer offsets
Consuming a partition sequentially makes it easy to tell which messages have been
processed: all messages with an offset less than a consumer’s current offset have
already been processed, and all messages with a greater offset have not yet been seen.
Thus, the broker does not need to track acknowledgments for every single message—
it only needs to periodically record the consumer offsets. The reduced bookkeeping
overhead and the opportunities for batching and pipelining in this approach help
increase the throughput of log-based systems.
This offset is in fact very similar to the log sequence number that is commonly found
in single-leader database replication, and which we discussed in “Setting Up New
Followers”  on page 155. In database replication, the log sequence number allows a
follower to reconnect to a leader after it has become disconnected, and resume repli‐
cation without skipping any writes. Exactly the same principle is used here: the mes‐
sage broker behaves like a leader database, and the consumer like a follower.
If a consumer node fails, another node in the consumer group is assigned the failed
consumer’s partitions, and it starts consuming messages at the last recorded offset. If
the consumer had processed subsequent messages but not yet recorded their offset,
those messages will be processed a second time upon restart. We will discuss ways of
dealing with this issue later in the chapter.
Transmitting Event Streams | 449

Disk space usage
If you only ever append to the log, you will eventually run out of disk space. To
reclaim disk space, the log is actually divided into segments, and from time to time
old segments are deleted or moved to archive storage. (We’ll discuss a more sophisti‐
cated way of freeing disk space later.)
This means that if a slow consumer cannot keep up with the rate of messages, and it
falls so far behind that its consumer offset points to a deleted segment, it will miss
some of the messages. Effectively, the log implements a bounded-size buffer that dis‐
cards old messages when it gets full, also known as a circular buffer  or ring buffer .
However, since that buffer is on disk, it can be quite large.
Let’s do a back-of-the-envelope calculation. At the time of writing, a typical large
hard drive has a capacity of 6 TB and a sequential write throughput of 150 MB/s. If
you are writing messages at the fastest possible rate, it takes about 11 hours to fill the
drive. Thus, the disk can buffer 11 hours’ worth of messages, after which it will start
overwriting old messages. This ratio remains the same, even if you use many hard
drives and machines. In practice, deployments rarely use the full write bandwidth of
the disk, so the log can typically keep a buffer of several days’ or even weeks’ worth of
messages.
Regardless of how long you retain messages, the throughput of a log remains more or
less constant, since every message is written to disk anyway [ 18]. This behavior is in
contrast to messaging systems that keep messages in memory by default and only
write them to disk if the queue grows too large: such systems are fast when queues are
short and become much slower when they start writing to disk, so the throughput
depends on the amount of history retained.
When consumers cannot keep up with producers
At the beginning of “Messaging Systems” on page 441 we discussed three choices of
what to do if a consumer cannot keep up with the rate at which producers are send‐
ing messages: dropping messages, buffering, or applying backpressure. In this taxon‐
omy, the log-based approach is a form of buffering with a large but fixed-size buffer
(limited by the available disk space).
If a consumer falls so far behind that the messages it requires are older than what is
retained on disk, it will not be able to read those messages—so the broker effectively
drops old messages that go back further than the size of the buffer can accommodate.
You can monitor how far a consumer is behind the head of the log, and raise an alert
if it falls behind significantly. As the buffer is large, there is enough time for a human
operator to fix the slow consumer and allow it to catch up before it starts missing
messages.
450 | Chapter 11: Stream Processing

Even if a consumer does fall too far behind and starts missing messages, only that
consumer is affected; it does not disrupt the service for other consumers. This fact is
a big operational advantage: you can experimentally consume a production log for
development, testing, or debugging purposes, without having to worry much about
disrupting production services. When a consumer is shut down or crashes, it stops
consuming resources—the only thing that remains is its consumer offset.
This behavior also contrasts with traditional message brokers, where you need to be
careful to delete any queues whose consumers have been shut down—otherwise they
continue unnecessarily accumulating messages and taking away memory from con‐
sumers that are still active.
Replaying old messages
We noted previously that with AMQP- and JMS-style message brokers, processing
and acknowledging messages is a destructive operation, since it causes the messages
to be deleted on the broker. On the other hand, in a log-based message broker, con‐
suming messages is more like reading from a file: it is a read-only operation that does
not change the log.
The only side effect of processing, besides any output of the consumer, is that the
consumer offset moves forward. But the offset is under the consumer’s control, so it
can easily be manipulated if necessary: for example, you can start a copy of a con‐
sumer with yesterday’s offsets and write the output to a different location, in order to
reprocess the last day’s worth of messages. You can repeat this any number of times,
varying the processing code.
This aspect makes log-based messaging more like the batch processes of the last
chapter, where derived data is clearly separated from input data through a repeatable
transformation process. It allows more experimentation and easier recovery from
errors and bugs, making it a good tool for integrating dataflows within an organiza‐
tion [24]. 
Databases and Streams
We have drawn some comparisons between message brokers and databases. Even
though they have traditionally been considered separate categories of tools, we saw
that log-based message brokers have been successful in taking ideas from databases
and applying them to messaging. We can also go in reverse: take ideas from messag‐
ing and streams, and apply them to databases.
We said previously that an event is a record of something that happened at some
point in time. The thing that happened may be a user action (e.g., typing a search
query), or a sensor reading, but it may also be a write to a database . The fact that
something was written to a database is an event that can be captured, stored, and pro‐
Databases and Streams | 451

cessed. This observation suggests that the connection between databases and streams
runs deeper than just the physical storage of logs on disk—it is quite fundamental.
In fact, a replication log (see “Implementation of Replication Logs”  on page 158) is a
stream of database write events, produced by the leader as it processes transactions.
The followers apply that stream of writes to their own copy of the database and thus
end up with an accurate copy of the same data. The events in the replication log
describe the data changes that occurred.
We also came across the state machine replication  principle in “Total Order Broad‐
cast”  on page 348, which states: if every event represents a write to the database, and
every replica processes the same events in the same order, then the replicas will all
end up in the same final state. (Processing an event is assumed to be a deterministic
operation.) It’s just another case of event streams!
In this section we will first look at a problem that arises in heterogeneous data sys‐
tems, and then explore how we can solve it by bringing ideas from event streams to
databases.
Keeping Systems in Sync
As we have seen throughout this book, there is no single system that can satisfy all
data storage, querying, and processing needs. In practice, most nontrivial applica‐
tions need to combine several different technologies in order to satisfy their require‐
ments: for example, using an OLTP database to serve user requests, a cache to speed
up common requests, a full-text index to handle search queries, and a data warehouse
for analytics. Each of these has its own copy of the data, stored in its own representa‐
tion that is optimized for its own purposes.
As the same or related data appears in several different places, they need to be kept in
sync with one another: if an item is updated in the database, it also needs to be upda‐
ted in the cache, search indexes, and data warehouse. With data warehouses this syn‐
chronization is usually performed by ETL processes (see “Data Warehousing” on
page 91), often by taking a full copy of a database, transforming it, and bulk-loading
it into the data warehouse—in other words, a batch process. Similarly, we saw in
“The Output of Batch Workflows” on page 411  how search indexes, recommendation
systems, and other derived data systems might be created using batch processes.
If periodic full database dumps are too slow, an alternative that is sometimes used is
dual writes , in which the application code explicitly writes to each of the systems
when data changes: for example, first writing to the database, then updating the
search index, then invalidating the cache entries (or even performing those writes
concurrently).
However, dual writes have some serious problems, one of which is a race condition
illustrated in Figure 11-4. In this example, two clients concurrently want to update an
452 | Chapter 11: Stream Processing

item X: client 1 wants to set the value to A, and client 2 wants to set it to B. Both
clients first write the new value to the database, then write it to the search index. Due
to unlucky timing, the requests are interleaved: the database first sees the write from
client 1 setting the value to A, then the write from client 2 setting the value to B, so
the final value in the database is B. The search index first sees the write from client 2,
then client 1, so the final value in the search index is A. The two systems are now
permanently inconsistent with each other, even though no error occurred.
Figure 11-4. In the database, X is first set to A and then to B, while at the search index
the writes arrive in the opposite order.
Unless you have some additional concurrency detection mechanism, such as the ver‐
sion vectors we discussed in “Detecting Concurrent Writes” on page 184 , you will not
even notice that concurrent writes occurred—one value will simply silently overwrite
another value.
Another problem with dual writes is that one of the writes may fail while the other
succeeds. This is a fault-tolerance problem rather than a concurrency problem, but it
also has the effect of the two systems becoming inconsistent with each other. Ensur‐
ing that they either both succeed or both fail is a case of the atomic commit problem,
which is expensive to solve (see “Atomic Commit and Two-Phase Commit (2PC)”  on
page 354).
If you only have one replicated database with a single leader, then that leader deter‐
mines the order of writes, so the state machine replication approach works among
replicas of the database. However, in Figure 11-4 there isn’t a single leader: the data‐
base may have a leader and the search index may have a leader, but neither follows
the other, and so conflicts can occur (see “Multi-Leader Replication” on page 168 ).
The situation would be better if there really was only one leader—for example, the
database—and if we could make the search index a follower of the database. But is
this possible in practice? 
Databases and Streams | 453

Change Data Capture
The problem with most databases’ replication logs is that they have long been consid‐
ered to be an internal implementation detail of the database, not a public API. Clients
are supposed to query the database through its data model and query language, not
parse the replication logs and try to extract data from them.
For decades, many databases simply did not have a documented way of getting the
log of changes written to them. For this reason it was difficult to take all the changes
made in a database and replicate them to a different storage technology such as a
search index, cache, or data warehouse.
More recently, there has been growing interest in change data capture (CDC), which
is the process of observing all data changes written to a database and extracting them
in a form in which they can be replicated to other systems. CDC is especially interest‐
ing if changes are made available as a stream, immediately as they are written.
For example, you can capture the changes in a database and continually apply the
same changes to a search index. If the log of changes is applied in the same order, you
can expect the data in the search index to match the data in the database. The search
index and any other derived data systems are just consumers of the change stream, as
illustrated in Figure 11-5.
Figure 11-5. Taking data in the order it was written to one database, and applying the
changes to other systems in the same order.
Implementing change data capture
We can call the log consumers derived data systems, as discussed in the introduction
to Part III: the data stored in the search index and the data warehouse is just another
view onto the data in the system of record. Change data capture is a mechanism for
ensuring that all changes made to the system of record are also reflected in the
derived data systems so that the derived systems have an accurate copy of the data.
454 | Chapter 11: Stream Processing

Essentially, change data capture makes one database the leader (the one from which
the changes are captured), and turns the others into followers. A log-based message
broker is well suited for transporting the change events from the source database,
since it preserves the ordering of messages (avoiding the reordering issue of
Figure 11-2).
Database triggers can be used to implement change data capture (see “Trigger-based
replication”  on page 161) by registering triggers that observe all changes to data
tables and add corresponding entries to a changelog table. However, they tend to be
fragile and have significant performance overheads. Parsing the replication log can be
a more robust approach, although it also comes with challenges, such as handling
schema changes.
LinkedIn’s Databus [ 25], Facebook’s Wormhole [ 26], and Yahoo!’s Sherpa [ 27] use
this idea at large scale. Bottled Water implements CDC for PostgreSQL using an API
that decodes the write-ahead log [ 28], Maxwell and Debezium do something similar
for MySQL by parsing the binlog [ 29, 30, 31], Mongoriver reads the MongoDB oplog
[32, 33], and GoldenGate provides similar facilities for Oracle [34, 35].
Like message brokers, change data capture is usually asynchronous: the system of
record database does not wait for the change to be applied to consumers before com‐
mitting it. This design has the operational advantage that adding a slow consumer
does not affect the system of record too much, but it has the downside that all the
issues of replication lag apply (see “Problems with Replication Lag” on page 161 ).
Initial snapshot
If you have the log of all changes that were ever made to a database, you can recon‐
struct the entire state of the database by replaying the log. However, in many cases,
keeping all changes forever would require too much disk space, and replaying it
would take too long, so the log needs to be truncated.
Building a new full-text index, for example, requires a full copy of the entire database
—it is not sufficient to only apply a log of recent changes, since it would be missing
items that were not recently updated. Thus, if you don’t have the entire log history,
you need to start with a consistent snapshot, as previously discussed in “Setting Up
New Followers” on page 155 .
The snapshot of the database must correspond to a known position or offset in the
change log, so that you know at which point to start applying changes after the snap‐
shot has been processed. Some CDC tools integrate this snapshot facility, while oth‐
ers leave it as a manual operation.
Databases and Streams | 455

Log compaction
If you can only keep a limited amount of log history, you need to go through the
snapshot process every time you want to add a new derived data system. However,
log compaction provides a good alternative.
We discussed log compaction previously in “Hash Indexes”  on page 72, in the con‐
text of log-structured storage engines (see Figure 3-2 for an example). The principle
is simple: the storage engine periodically looks for log records with the same key,
throws away any duplicates, and keeps only the most recent update for each key. This
compaction and merging process runs in the background.
In a log-structured storage engine, an update with a special null value (a tombstone)
indicates that a key was deleted, and causes it to be removed during log compaction.
But as long as a key is not overwritten or deleted, it stays in the log forever. The disk
space required for such a compacted log depends only on the current contents of the
database, not the number of writes that have ever occurred in the database. If the
same key is frequently overwritten, previous values will eventually be garbage-
collected, and only the latest value will be retained.
The same idea works in the context of log-based message brokers and change data
capture. If the CDC system is set up such that every change has a primary key, and
every update for a key replaces the previous value for that key, then it’s sufficient to
keep just the most recent write for a particular key.
Now, whenever you want to rebuild a derived data system such as a search index, you
can start a new consumer from offset 0 of the log-compacted topic, and sequentially
scan over all messages in the log. The log is guaranteed to contain the most recent
value for every key in the database (and maybe some older values)—in other words,
you can use it to obtain a full copy of the database contents without having to take
another snapshot of the CDC source database.
This log compaction feature is supported by Apache Kafka. As we shall see later in
this chapter, it allows the message broker to be used for durable storage, not just for
transient messaging.
API support for change streams
Increasingly, databases are beginning to support change streams as a first-class inter‐
face, rather than the typical retrofitted and reverse-engineered CDC efforts. For
example, RethinkDB allows queries to subscribe to notifications when the results of a
query change [ 36], Firebase [ 37] and CouchDB [ 38] provide data synchronization
based on a change feed that is also made available to applications, and Meteor uses
the MongoDB oplog to subscribe to data changes and update the user interface [39].
VoltDB allows transactions to continuously export data from a database in the form
of a stream [ 40]. The database represents an output stream in the relational data
456 | Chapter 11: Stream Processing

model as a table into which transactions can insert tuples, but which cannot be quer‐
ied. The stream then consists of the log of tuples that committed transactions have
written to this special table, in the order they were committed. External consumers
can asynchronously consume this log and use it to update derived data systems.
Kafka Connect [ 41] is an effort to integrate change data capture tools for a wide
range of database systems with Kafka. Once the stream of change events is in Kafka, it
can be used to update derived data systems such as search indexes, and also feed into
stream processing systems as discussed later in this chapter. 
Event Sourcing
There are some parallels between the ideas we’ve discussed here and event sourcing, a
technique that was developed in the domain-driven design (DDD) community [ 42,
43, 44]. We will discuss event sourcing briefly, because it incorporates some useful
and relevant ideas for streaming systems.
Similarly to change data capture, event sourcing involves storing all changes to the
application state as a log of change events. The biggest difference is that event sourc‐
ing applies the idea at a different level of abstraction:
• In change data capture, the application uses the database in a mutable way,
updating and deleting records at will. The log of changes is extracted from the
database at a low level (e.g., by parsing the replication log), which ensures that
the order of writes extracted from the database matches the order in which they
were actually written, avoiding the race condition in Figure 11-4. The application
writing to the database does not need to be aware that CDC is occurring.
• In event sourcing, the application logic is explicitly built on the basis of immuta‐
ble events that are written to an event log. In this case, the event store is append-
only, and updates or deletes are discouraged or prohibited. Events are designed
to reflect things that happened at the application level, rather than low-level state
changes.
Event sourcing is a powerful technique for data modeling: from an application point
of view it is more meaningful to record the user’s actions as immutable events, rather
than recording the effect of those actions on a mutable database. Event sourcing
makes it easier to evolve applications over time, helps with debugging by making it
easier to understand after the fact why something happened, and guards against
application bugs (see “Advantages of immutable events” on page 460 ).
For example, storing the event “student cancelled their course enrollment” clearly
expresses the intent of a single action in a neutral fashion, whereas the side effects
“one entry was deleted from the enrollments table, and one cancellation reason was
added to the student feedback table” embed a lot of assumptions about the way the
Databases and Streams | 457

data is later going to be used. If a new application feature is introduced—for example,
“the place is offered to the next person on the waiting list”—the event sourcing
approach allows that new side effect to easily be chained off the existing event.
Event sourcing is similar to the chronicle data model [45], and there are also similari‐
ties between an event log and the fact table that you find in a star schema (see “Stars
and Snowflakes: Schemas for Analytics” on page 93 ).
Specialized databases such as Event Store [ 46] have been developed to support appli‐
cations using event sourcing, but in general the approach is independent of any par‐
ticular tool. A conventional database or a log-based message broker can also be used
to build applications in this style.
Deriving current state from the event log
An event log by itself is not very useful, because users generally expect to see the cur‐
rent state of a system, not the history of modifications. For example, on a shopping
website, users expect to be able to see the current contents of their cart, not an
append-only list of all the changes they have ever made to their cart.
Thus, applications that use event sourcing need to take the log of events (representing
the data written to the system) and transform it into application state that is suitable
for showing to a user (the way in which data is read from the system [ 47]). This
transformation can use arbitrary logic, but it should be deterministic so that you can
run it again and derive the same application state from the event log.
Like with change data capture, replaying the event log allows you to reconstruct the
current state of the system. However, log compaction needs to be handled differently:
• A CDC event for the update of a record typically contains the entire new version
of the record, so the current value for a primary key is entirely determined by the
most recent event for that primary key, and log compaction can discard previous
events for the same key.
• On the other hand, with event sourcing, events are modeled at a higher level: an
event typically expresses the intent of a user action, not the mechanics of the state
update that occurred as a result of the action. In this case, later events typically
do not override prior events, and so you need the full history of events to recon‐
struct the final state. Log compaction is not possible in the same way.
Applications that use event sourcing typically have some mechanism for storing
snapshots of the current state that is derived from the log of events, so they don’t
need to repeatedly reprocess the full log. However, this is only a performance optimi‐
zation to speed up reads and recovery from crashes; the intention is that the system is
able to store all raw events forever and reprocess the full event log whenever required.
We discuss this assumption in “Limitations of immutability” on page 463 . 
458 | Chapter 11: Stream Processing

Commands and events
The event sourcing philosophy is careful to distinguish between events and com‐
mands [48]. When a request from a user first arrives, it is initially a command: at this
point it may still fail, for example because some integrity condition is violated. The
application must first validate that it can execute the command. If the validation is
successful and the command is accepted, it becomes an event, which is durable and
immutable.
For example, if a user tries to register a particular username, or reserve a seat on an
airplane or in a theater, then the application needs to check that the username or seat
is not already taken. (We previously discussed this example in “Fault-Tolerant Con‐
sensus”  on page 364.) When that check has succeeded, the application can generate
an event to indicate that a particular username was registered by a particular user ID,
or that a particular seat has been reserved for a particular customer.
At the point when the event is generated, it becomes a fact. Even if the customer later
decides to change or cancel the reservation, the fact remains true that they formerly
held a reservation for a particular seat, and the change or cancellation is a separate
event that is added later.
A consumer of the event stream is not allowed to reject an event: by the time the con‐
sumer sees the event, it is already an immutable part of the log, and it may have
already been seen by other consumers. Thus, any validation of a command needs to
happen synchronously, before it becomes an event—for example, by using a serializa‐
ble transaction that atomically validates the command and publishes the event.
Alternatively, the user request to reserve a seat could be split into two events: first a
tentative reservation, and then a separate confirmation event once the reservation has
been validated (as discussed in “Implementing linearizable storage using total order
broadcast” on page 350). This split allows the validation to take place in an asynchro‐
nous process. 
State, Streams, and Immutability
We saw in Chapter 10  that batch processing benefits from the immutability of its
input files, so you can run experimental processing jobs on existing input files
without fear of damaging them. This principle of immutability is also what makes
event sourcing and change data capture so powerful.
We normally think of databases as storing the current state of the application—this
representation is optimized for reads, and it is usually the most convenient for serv‐
ing queries. The nature of state is that it changes, so databases support updating and
deleting data as well as inserting it. How does this fit with immutability?
Databases and Streams | 459

Whenever you have state that changes, that state is the result of the events that muta‐
ted it over time. For example, your list of currently available seats is the result of the
reservations you have processed, the current account balance is the result of the cred‐
its and debits on the account, and the response time graph for your web server is an
aggregation of the individual response times of all web requests that have occurred.
No matter how the state changes, there was always a sequence of events that caused
those changes. Even as things are done and undone, the fact remains true that those
events occurred. The key idea is that mutable state and an append-only log of immut‐
able events do not contradict each other: they are two sides of the same coin. The log
of all changes, the changelog, represents the evolution of state over time.
If you are mathematically inclined, you might say that the application state is what
you get when you integrate an event stream over time, and a change stream is what
you get when you differentiate the state by time, as shown in Figure 11-6 [49, 50, 51].
The analogy has limitations (for example, the second derivative of state does not
seem to be meaningful), but it’s a useful starting point for thinking about data.
Figure 11-6. The relationship between the current application state and an event
stream.
If you store the changelog durably, that simply has the effect of making the state
reproducible. If you consider the log of events to be your system of record, and any
mutable state as being derived from it, it becomes easier to reason about the flow of
data through a system. As Pat Helland puts it [52]:
Transaction logs record all the changes made to the database. High-speed appends are
the only way to change the log. From this perspective, the contents of the database
hold a caching of the latest record values in the logs. The truth is the log. The database
is a cache of a subset of the log. That cached subset happens to be the latest value of
each record and index value from the log.
Log compaction, as discussed in “Log compaction” on page 456, is one way of bridg‐
ing the distinction between log and database state: it retains only the latest version of
each record, and discards overwritten versions.
Advantages of immutable events
Immutability in databases is an old idea. For example, accountants have been using
immutability for centuries in financial bookkeeping. When a transaction occurs, it is
460 | Chapter 11: Stream Processing

recorded in an append-only ledger, which is essentially a log of events describing
money, goods, or services that have changed hands. The accounts, such as profit and
loss or the balance sheet, are derived from the transactions in the ledger by adding
them up [53].
If a mistake is made, accountants don’t erase or change the incorrect transaction in
the ledger—instead, they add another transaction that compensates for the mistake,
for example refunding an incorrect charge. The incorrect transaction still remains in
the ledger forever, because it might be important for auditing reasons. If incorrect
figures, derived from the incorrect ledger, have already been published, then the fig‐
ures for the next accounting period include a correction. This process is entirely nor‐
mal in accounting [54].
Although such auditability is particularly important in financial systems, it is also
beneficial for many other systems that are not subject to such strict regulation. As
discussed in “Philosophy of batch process outputs” on page 413, if you accidentally
deploy buggy code that writes bad data to a database, recovery is much harder if the
code is able to destructively overwrite data. With an append-only log of immutable
events, it is much easier to diagnose what happened and recover from the problem.
Immutable events also capture more information than just the current state. For
example, on a shopping website, a customer may add an item to their cart and then
remove it again. Although the second event cancels out the first event from the point
of view of order fulfillment, it may be useful to know for analytics purposes that the
customer was considering a particular item but then decided against it. Perhaps they
will choose to buy it in the future, or perhaps they found a substitute. This informa‐
tion is recorded in an event log, but would be lost in a database that deletes items
when they are removed from the cart [42].
Deriving several views from the same event log
Moreover, by separating mutable state from the immutable event log, you can derive
several different read-oriented representations from the same log of events. This
works just like having multiple consumers of a stream ( Figure 11-5): for example, the
analytic database Druid ingests directly from Kafka using this approach [ 55], Pista‐
chio is a distributed key-value store that uses Kafka as a commit log [ 56], and Kafka
Connect sinks can export data from Kafka to various different databases and indexes
[41]. It would make sense for many other storage and indexing systems, such as
search servers, to similarly take their input from a distributed log (see “Keeping Sys‐
tems in Sync” on page 452 ).
Having an explicit translation step from an event log to a database makes it easier to
evolve your application over time: if you want to introduce a new feature that
presents your existing data in some new way, you can use the event log to build a
separate read-optimized view for the new feature, and run it alongside the existing
Databases and Streams | 461

systems without having to modify them. Running old and new systems side by side is
often easier than performing a complicated schema migration in an existing system.
Once the old system is no longer needed, you can simply shut it down and reclaim its
resources [47, 57].
Storing data is normally quite straightforward if you don’t have to worry about how it
is going to be queried and accessed; many of the complexities of schema design,
indexing, and storage engines are the result of wanting to support certain query and
access patterns (see Chapter 3). For this reason, you gain a lot of flexibility by sepa‐
rating the form in which data is written from the form it is read, and by allowing sev‐
eral different read views. This idea is sometimes known as command query
responsibility segregation (CQRS) [42, 58, 59].
The traditional approach to database and schema design is based on the fallacy that
data must be written in the same form as it will be queried. Debates about normaliza‐
tion and denormalization (see “Many-to-One and Many-to-Many Relationships”  on
page 33) become largely irrelevant if you can translate data from a write-optimized
event log to read-optimized application state: it is entirely reasonable to denormalize
data in the read-optimized views, as the translation process gives you a mechanism
for keeping it consistent with the event log.
In “Describing Load” on page 11 we discussed Twitter’s home timelines, a cache of
recently written tweets by the people a particular user is following (like a mailbox).
This is another example of read-optimized state: home timelines are highly denor‐
malized, since your tweets are duplicated in all of the timelines of the people follow‐
ing you. However, the fan-out service keeps this duplicated state in sync with new
tweets and new following relationships, which keeps the duplication manageable.
Concurrency control
The biggest downside of event sourcing and change data capture is that the consum‐
ers of the event log are usually asynchronous, so there is a possibility that a user may
make a write to the log, then read from a log-derived view and find that their write
has not yet been reflected in the read view. We discussed this problem and potential
solutions previously in “Reading Your Own Writes” on page 162 .
One solution would be to perform the updates of the read view synchronously with
appending the event to the log. This requires a transaction to combine the writes into
an atomic unit, so either you need to keep the event log and the read view in the same
storage system, or you need a distributed transaction across the different systems.
Alternatively, you could use the approach discussed in “Implementing linearizable
storage using total order broadcast” on page 350 .
On the other hand, deriving the current state from an event log also simplifies some
aspects of concurrency control. Much of the need for multi-object transactions (see
“Single-Object and Multi-Object Operations” on page 228) stems from a single user
462 | Chapter 11: Stream Processing

action requiring data to be changed in several different places. With event sourcing,
you can design an event such that it is a self-contained description of a user action.
The user action then requires only a single write in one place—namely appending the
events to the log—which is easy to make atomic.
If the event log and the application state are partitioned in the same way (for exam‐
ple, processing an event for a customer in partition 3 only requires updating partition
3 of the application state), then a straightforward single-threaded log consumer needs
no concurrency control for writes—by construction, it only processes a single event
at a time (see also “Actual Serial Execution” on page 252). The log removes the non‐
determinism of concurrency by defining a serial order of events in a partition [ 24]. If
an event touches multiple state partitions, a bit more work is required, which we will
discuss in Chapter 12. 
Limitations of immutability
Many systems that don’t use an event-sourced model nevertheless rely on immutabil‐
ity: various databases internally use immutable data structures or multi-version data
to support point-in-time snapshots (see “Indexes and snapshot isolation” on page
241). Version control systems such as Git, Mercurial, and Fossil also rely on immuta‐
ble data to preserve version history of files.
To what extent is it feasible to keep an immutable history of all changes forever? The
answer depends on the amount of churn in the dataset. Some workloads mostly add
data and rarely update or delete; they are easy to make immutable. Other workloads
have a high rate of updates and deletes on a comparatively small dataset; in these
cases, the immutable history may grow prohibitively large, fragmentation may
become an issue, and the performance of compaction and garbage collection
becomes crucial for operational robustness [60, 61].
Besides the performance reasons, there may also be circumstances in which you need
data to be deleted for administrative reasons, in spite of all immutability. For exam‐
ple, privacy regulations may require deleting a user’s personal information after they
close their account, data protection legislation may require erroneous information to
be removed, or an accidental leak of sensitive information may need to be contained.
In these circumstances, it’s not sufficient to just append another event to the log to
indicate that the prior data should be considered deleted—you actually want to
rewrite history and pretend that the data was never written in the first place. For
example, Datomic calls this feature excision [62], and the Fossil version control sys‐
tem has a similar concept called shunning [63].
Truly deleting data is surprisingly hard [ 64], since copies can live in many places: for
example, storage engines, filesystems, and SSDs often write to a new location rather
than overwriting in place [ 52], and backups are often deliberately immutable to pre‐
vent accidental deletion or corruption. Deletion is more a matter of “making it harder
Databases and Streams | 463

to retrieve the data” than actually “making it impossible to retrieve the data.” Never‐
theless, you sometimes have to try, as we shall see in “Legislation and self-regulation”
on page 542. 
Processing Streams
So far in this chapter we have talked about where streams come from (user activity
events, sensors, and writes to databases), and we have talked about how streams are
transported (through direct messaging, via message brokers, and in event logs).
What remains is to discuss what you can do with the stream once you have it—
namely, you can process it. Broadly, there are three options:
1. You can take the data in the events and write it to a database, cache, search index,
or similar storage system, from where it can then be queried by other clients. As
shown in Figure 11-5 , this is a good way of keeping a database in sync with
changes happening in other parts of the system—especially if the stream con‐
sumer is the only client writing to the database. Writing to a storage system is the
streaming equivalent of what we discussed in “The Output of Batch Workflows”
on page 411.
2. You can push the events to users in some way, for example by sending email
alerts or push notifications, or by streaming the events to a real-time dashboard
where they are visualized. In this case, a human is the ultimate consumer of the
stream.
3. You can process one or more input streams to produce one or more output
streams. Streams may go through a pipeline consisting of several such processing
stages before they eventually end up at an output (option 1 or 2).
In the rest of this chapter, we will discuss option 3: processing streams to produce
other, derived streams. A piece of code that processes streams like this is known as an
operator or a job. It is closely related to the Unix processes and MapReduce jobs we
discussed in Chapter 10 , and the pattern of dataflow is similar: a stream processor
consumes input streams in a read-only fashion and writes its output to a different
location in an append-only fashion.
The patterns for partitioning and parallelization in stream processors are also very
similar to those in MapReduce and the dataflow engines we saw in Chapter 10, so we
won’t repeat those topics here. Basic mapping operations such as transforming and
filtering records also work the same.
The one crucial difference to batch jobs is that a stream never ends. This difference
has many implications: as discussed at the start of this chapter, sorting does not make
sense with an unbounded dataset, and so sort-merge joins (see “Reduce-Side Joins
and Grouping” on page 403) cannot be used. Fault-tolerance mechanisms must also
464 | Chapter 11: Stream Processing

change: with a batch job that has been running for a few minutes, a failed task can
simply be restarted from the beginning, but with a stream job that has been running
for several years, restarting from the beginning after a crash may not be a viable
option.
Uses of Stream Processing
Stream processing has long been used for monitoring purposes, where an organiza‐
tion wants to be alerted if certain things happen. For example:
• Fraud detection systems need to determine if the usage patterns of a credit card
have unexpectedly changed, and block the card if it is likely to have been stolen.
• Trading systems need to examine price changes in a financial market and execute
trades according to specified rules.
• Manufacturing systems need to monitor the status of machines in a factory, and
quickly identify the problem if there is a malfunction.
• Military and intelligence systems need to track the activities of a potential aggres‐
sor, and raise the alarm if there are signs of an attack.
These kinds of applications require quite sophisticated pattern matching and correla‐
tions. However, other uses of stream processing have also emerged over time. In this
section we will briefly compare and contrast some of these applications.
Complex event processing
Complex event processing (CEP) is an approach developed in the 1990s for analyzing
event streams, especially geared toward the kind of application that requires search‐
ing for certain event patterns [ 65, 66]. Similarly to the way that a regular expression
allows you to search for certain patterns of characters in a string, CEP allows you to
specify rules to search for certain patterns of events in a stream.
CEP systems often use a high-level declarative query language like SQL, or a graphi‐
cal user interface, to describe the patterns of events that should be detected. These
queries are submitted to a processing engine that consumes the input streams and
internally maintains a state machine that performs the required matching. When a
match is found, the engine emits a complex event (hence the name) with the details of
the event pattern that was detected [67].
In these systems, the relationship between queries and data is reversed compared to
normal databases. Usually, a database stores data persistently and treats queries as
transient: when a query comes in, the database searches for data matching the query,
and then forgets about the query when it has finished. CEP engines reverse these
roles: queries are stored long-term, and events from the input streams continuously
flow past them in search of a query that matches an event pattern [68].
Processing Streams | 465

Implementations of CEP include Esper [ 69], IBM InfoSphere Streams [ 70], Apama,
TIBCO StreamBase, and SQLstream. Distributed stream processors like Samza are
also gaining SQL support for declarative queries on streams [71].
Stream analytics
Another area in which stream processing is used is for analytics on streams. The
boundary between CEP and stream analytics is blurry, but as a general rule, analytics
tends to be less interested in finding specific event sequences and is more oriented
toward aggregations and statistical metrics over a large number of events—for exam‐
ple:
• Measuring the rate of some type of event (how often it occurs per time interval)
• Calculating the rolling average of a value over some time period
• Comparing current statistics to previous time intervals (e.g., to detect trends or
to alert on metrics that are unusually high or low compared to the same time last
week)
Such statistics are usually computed over fixed time intervals—for example, you
might want to know the average number of queries per second to a service over the
last 5 minutes, and their 99th percentile response time during that period. Averaging
over a few minutes smoothes out irrelevant fluctuations from one second to the next,
while still giving you a timely picture of any changes in traffic pattern. The time
interval over which you aggregate is known as a window, and we will look into win‐
dowing in more detail in “Reasoning About Time” on page 468 .
Stream analytics systems sometimes use probabilistic algorithms, such as Bloom fil‐
ters (which we encountered in “Performance optimizations” on page 79) for set
membership, HyperLogLog [ 72] for cardinality estimation, and various percentile
estimation algorithms (see “Percentiles in Practice” on page 16). Probabilistic algo‐
rithms produce approximate results, but have the advantage of requiring significantly
less memory in the stream processor than exact algorithms. This use of approxima‐
tion algorithms sometimes leads people to believe that stream processing systems are
always lossy and inexact, but that is wrong: there is nothing inherently approximate
about stream processing, and probabilistic algorithms are merely an optimization
[73].
Many open source distributed stream processing frameworks are designed with ana‐
lytics in mind: for example, Apache Storm, Spark Streaming, Flink, Concord, Samza,
and Kafka Streams [ 74]. Hosted services include Google Cloud Dataflow and Azure
Stream Analytics.
466 | Chapter 11: Stream Processing