Log-based message broker
The broker assigns all messages in a partition to the same consumer node, and
always delivers messages in the same order. Parallelism is achieved through par‐
titioning, and consumers track their progress by checkpointing the offset of the
last message they have processed. The broker retains messages on disk, so it is
possible to jump back and reread old messages if necessary.
The log-based approach has similarities to the replication logs found in databases
(see Chapter 5) and log-structured storage engines (see Chapter 3). We saw that this
approach is especially appropriate for stream processing systems that consume input
streams and generate derived state or derived output streams.
In terms of where streams come from, we discussed several possibilities: user activity
events, sensors providing periodic readings, and data feeds (e.g., market data in
finance) are naturally represented as streams. We saw that it can also be useful to
think of the writes to a database as a stream: we can capture the changelog—i.e., the
history of all changes made to a database—either implicitly through change data cap‐
ture or explicitly through event sourcing. Log compaction allows the stream to retain
a full copy of the contents of a database.
Representing databases as streams opens up powerful opportunities for integrating
systems. You can keep derived data systems such as search indexes, caches, and ana‐
lytics systems continually up to date by consuming the log of changes and applying
them to the derived system. You can even build fresh views onto existing data by
starting from scratch and consuming the log of changes from the beginning all the
way to the present.
The facilities for maintaining state as streams and replaying messages are also the
basis for the techniques that enable stream joins and fault tolerance in various stream
processing frameworks. We discussed several purposes of stream processing, includ‐
ing searching for event patterns (complex event processing), computing windowed
aggregations (stream analytics), and keeping derived data systems up to date (materi‐
alized views).
We then discussed the difficulties of reasoning about time in a stream processor,
including the distinction between processing time and event timestamps, and the
problem of dealing with straggler events that arrive after you thought your window
was complete.
We distinguished three types of joins that may appear in stream processes:
Stream-stream joins
Both input streams consist of activity events, and the join operator searches for
related events that occur within some window of time. For example, it may
match two actions taken by the same user within 30 minutes of each other. The
480 | Chapter 11: Stream Processing

two join inputs may in fact be the same stream (a self-join) if you want to find
related events within that one stream.
Stream-table joins
One input stream consists of activity events, while the other is a database change‐
log. The changelog keeps a local copy of the database up to date. For each activity
event, the join operator queries the database and outputs an enriched activity
event.
Table-table joins
Both input streams are database changelogs. In this case, every change on one
side is joined with the latest state of the other side. The result is a stream of
changes to the materialized view of the join between the two tables.
Finally, we discussed techniques for achieving fault tolerance and exactly-once
semantics in a stream processor. As with batch processing, we need to discard the
partial output of any failed tasks. However, since a stream process is long-running
and produces output continuously, we can’t simply discard all output. Instead, a
finer-grained recovery mechanism can be used, based on microbatching, checkpoint‐
ing, transactions, or idempotent writes. 
References
[1] Tyler Akidau, Robert Bradshaw, Craig Chambers, et al.: “ The Dataflow Model: A
Practical Approach to Balancing Correctness, Latency, and Cost in Massive-Scale,
Unbounded, Out-of-Order Data Processing ,” Proceedings of the VLDB Endowment ,
volume 8, number 12, pages 1792–1803, August 2015. doi:10.14778/2824032.2824076
[2] Harold Abelson, Gerald Jay Sussman, and Julie Sussman: Structure and Interpre‐
tation of Computer Programs , 2nd edition. MIT Press, 1996. ISBN:
978-0-262-51087-5, available online at mitpress.mit.edu
[3] Patrick Th. Eugster, Pascal A. Felber, Rachid Guerraoui, and Anne-Marie Ker‐
marrec: “ The Many Faces of Publish/Subscribe ,” ACM Computing Surveys , volume
35, number 2, pages 114–131, June 2003. doi:10.1145/857076.857078
[4] Joseph M. Hellerstein and Michael Stonebraker: Readings in Database Systems ,
4th edition. MIT Press, 2005. ISBN: 978-0-262-69314-1, available online at red‐
book.cs.berkeley.edu
[5] Don Carney, Uğur Çetintemel, Mitch Cherniack, et al.: “ Monitoring Streams – A
New Class of Data Management Applications ,” at 28th International Conference on
Very Large Data Bases (VLDB), August 2002.
[6] Matthew Sackman: “ Pushing Back,” lshift.net, May 5, 2016.
Summary | 481

[7] Vicent Martí: “ Brubeck, a statsd-Compatible Metrics Aggregator ,” githubengin‐
eering.com, June 15, 2015.
[8] Seth Lowenberger: “ MoldUDP64 Protocol Specification V 1.00 ,” nasdaq‐
trader.com, July 2009.
[9] Pieter Hintjens: ZeroMQ – The Guide . O’Reilly Media, 2013. ISBN:
978-1-449-33404-8
[10] Ian Malpass: “ Measure Anything, Measure Everything ,” codeascraft.com, Febru‐
ary 15, 2011.
[11] Dieter Plaetinck: “ 25 Graphite, Grafana and statsd Gotchas ,” blog.raintank.io,
March 3, 2016.
[12] Jeff Lindsay: “ Web Hooks to Revolutionize the Web ,” progrium.com, May 3,
2007.
[13] Jim N. Gray: “ Queues Are Databases ,” Microsoft Research Technical Report
MSR-TR-95-56, December 1995.
[14] Mark Hapner, Rich Burridge, Rahul Sharma, et al.: “ JSR-343 Java Message Ser‐
vice (JMS) 2.0 Specification,” jms-spec.java.net, March 2013.
[15] Sanjay Aiyagari, Matthew Arrott, Mark Atwell, et al.: “ AMQP: Advanced Mes‐
sage Queuing Protocol Specification,” Version 0-9-1, November 2008.
[16] “ Google Cloud Pub/Sub: A Google-Scale Messaging Service ,” cloud.google.com,
2016.
[17] “ Apache Kafka 0.9 Documentation,” kafka.apache.org, November 2015.
[18] Jay Kreps, Neha Narkhede, and Jun Rao: “ Kafka: A Distributed Messaging Sys‐
tem for Log Processing ,” at 6th International Workshop on Networking Meets Data‐
bases (NetDB), June 2011.
[19] “ Amazon Kinesis Streams Developer Guide,” docs.aws.amazon.com, April 2016.
[20] Leigh Stewart and Sijie Guo: “ Building DistributedLog: Twitter’s High-
Performance Replicated Log Service,” blog.twitter.com, September 16, 2015.
[21] “ DistributedLog Documentation,” Twitter, Inc., distributedlog.io, May 2016.
[22] Jay Kreps: “ Benchmarking Apache Kafka: 2 Million Writes Per Second (On
Three Cheap Machines),” engineering.linkedin.com, April 27, 2014.
[23] Kartik Paramasivam: “ How We’re Improving and Advancing Kafka at
LinkedIn,” engineering.linkedin.com, September 2, 2015.
[24] Jay Kreps: “ The Log: What Every Software Engineer Should Know About Real-
Time Data’s Unifying Abstraction ,” engineering.linkedin.com, December 16, 2013.
482 | Chapter 11: Stream Processing

[25] Shirshanka Das, Chavdar Botev, Kapil Surlaker, et al.: “ All Aboard the Data‐
bus!,” at 3rd ACM Symposium on Cloud Computing (SoCC), October 2012.
[26] Yogeshwer Sharma, Philippe Ajoux, Petchean Ang, et al.: “ Wormhole: Reliable
Pub-Sub to Support Geo-Replicated Internet Services ,” at 12th USENIX Symposium
on Networked Systems Design and Implementation (NSDI), May 2015.
[27] P. P. S. Narayan: “ Sherpa Update,” developer.yahoo.com, June 8, .
[28] Martin Kleppmann: “ Bottled Water: Real-Time Integration of PostgreSQL and
Kafka,” martin.kleppmann.com, April 23, 2015.
[29] Ben Osheroff: “ Introducing Maxwell, a mysql-to-kafka Binlog Processor ,” devel‐
oper.zendesk.com, August 20, 2015.
[30] Randall Hauch: “ Debezium 0.2.1 Released,” debezium.io, June 10, 2016.
[31] Prem Santosh Udaya Shankar: “ Streaming MySQL Tables in Real-Time to
Kafka,” engineeringblog.yelp.com, August 1, 2016.
[32] “ Mongoriver,” Stripe, Inc., github.com, September 2014.
[33] Dan Harvey: “ Change Data Capture with Mongo + Kafka ,” at Hadoop Users
Group UK, August 2015.
[34] “ Oracle GoldenGate 12c: Real-Time Access to Real-Time Information ,” Oracle
White Paper, March 2015.
[35] “ Oracle GoldenGate Fundamentals: How Oracle GoldenGate Works ,” Oracle
Corporation, youtube.com, November 2012.
[36] Slava Akhmechet: “ Advancing the Realtime Web ,” rethinkdb.com, January 27,
2015.
[37] “ Firebase Realtime Database Documentation ,” Google, Inc., firebase.google.com,
May 2016.
[38] “ Apache CouchDB 1.6 Documentation,” docs.couchdb.org, 2014.
[39] Matt DeBergalis: “ Meteor 0.7.0: Scalable Database Queries Using MongoDB
Oplog Instead of Poll-and-Diff,” info.meteor.com, December 17, 2013.
[40] “ Chapter 15. Importing and Exporting Live Data ,” VoltDB 6.4 User Manual,
docs.voltdb.com, June 2016.
[41] Neha Narkhede: “ Announcing Kafka Connect: Building Large-Scale Low-
Latency Data Pipelines,” confluent.io, February 18, 2016.
[42] Greg Young: “ CQRS and Event Sourcing,” at Code on the Beach, August 2014.
[43] Martin Fowler: “ Event Sourcing,” martinfowler.com, December 12, 2005.
Summary | 483

[44] Vaughn Vernon: Implementing Domain-Driven Design. Addison-Wesley Profes‐
sional, 2013. ISBN: 978-0-321-83457-7
[45] H. V. Jagadish, Inderpal Singh Mumick, and Abraham Silberschatz: “ View
Maintenance Issues for the Chronicle Data Model ,” at 14th ACM SIGACT-SIGMOD-
SIGART Symposium on Principles of Database Systems  (PODS), May 1995. doi:
10.1145/212433.220201
[46] “ Event Store 3.5.0 Documentation ,” Event Store LLP, docs.geteventstore.com,
February 2016.
[47] Martin Kleppmann: Making Sense of Stream Processing . Report, O’Reilly Media,
May 2016.
[48] Sander Mak: “ Event-Sourced Architectures with Akka ,” at JavaOne, September
2014.
[49] Julian Hyde: personal communication, June 2016.
[50] Ashish Gupta and Inderpal Singh Mumick: Materialized Views: Techniques,
Implementations, and Applications. MIT Press, 1999. ISBN: 978-0-262-57122-7
[51] Timothy Griffin and Leonid Libkin: “ Incremental Maintenance of Views with
Duplicates,” at ACM International Conference on Management of Data  (SIGMOD),
May 1995. doi:10.1145/223784.223849
[52] Pat Helland: “ Immutability Changes Everything ,” at 7th Biennial Conference on
Innovative Data Systems Research (CIDR), January 2015.
[53] Martin Kleppmann: “ Accounting for Computer Scientists ,” martin.klepp‐
mann.com, March 7, 2011.
[54] Pat Helland: “ Accountants Don’t Use Erasers ,” blogs.msdn.com, June 14, 2007.
[55] Fangjin Yang: “ Dogfooding with Druid, Samza, and Kafka: Metametrics at Met‐
amarkets,” metamarkets.com, June 3, 2015.
[56] Gavin Li, Jianqiu Lv, and Hang Qi: “ Pistachio: Co-Locate the Data and Compute
for Fastest Cloud Compute,” yahoohadoop.tumblr.com, April 13, 2015.
[57] Kartik Paramasivam: “ Stream Processing Hard Problems – Part 1: Killing
Lambda,” engineering.linkedin.com, June 27, 2016.
[58] Martin Fowler: “ CQRS,” martinfowler.com, July 14, 2011.
[59] Greg Young: “ CQRS Documents,” cqrs.files.wordpress.com, November 2010.
[60] Baron Schwartz: “ Immutability, MVCC, and Garbage Collection ,” xaprb.com,
December 28, 2013.
484 | Chapter 11: Stream Processing

[61] Daniel Eloff, Slava Akhmechet, Jay Kreps, et al.: “Re: Turning the Database
Inside-out with Apache Samza ,” Hacker News discussion, news.ycombinator.com,
March 4, 2015.
[62] “ Datomic Development Resources: Excision,” Cognitect, Inc., docs.datomic.com.
[63] “ Fossil Documentation: Deleting Content from Fossil,” fossil-scm.org, 2016.
[64] Jay Kreps: “ The irony of distributed systems is that data loss is really easy but
deleting data is surprisingly hard,” twitter.com, March 30, 2015.
[65] David C. Luckham: “ What’s the Difference Between ESP and CEP? ,” complexe‐
vents.com, August 1, 2006.
[66] Srinath Perera: “ How Is Stream Processing and Complex Event Processing
(CEP) Different?,” quora.com, December 3, 2015.
[67] Arvind Arasu, Shivnath Babu, and Jennifer Widom: “ The CQL Continuous
Query Language: Semantic Foundations and Query Execution ,” The VLDB Journal ,
volume 15, number 2, pages 121–142, June 2006. doi:10.1007/s00778-004-0147-z
[68] Julian Hyde: “ Data in Flight: How Streaming SQL Technology Can Help Solve
the Web 2.0 Data Crunch ,” ACM Queue, volume 7, number 11, December 2009. doi:
10.1145/1661785.1667562
[69] “ Esper Reference, Version 5.4.0,” EsperTech, Inc., espertech.com, April 2016.
[70] Zubair Nabi, Eric Bouillet, Andrew Bainbridge, and Chris Thomas: “ Of Streams
and Storms,” IBM technical report, developer.ibm.com, April 2014.
[71] Milinda Pathirage, Julian Hyde, Yi Pan, and Beth Plale: “ SamzaSQL: Scalable
Fast Data Management with Streaming SQL ,” at IEEE International Workshop on
High-Performance Big Data Computing  (HPBDC), May 2016. doi:10.1109/IPDPSW.
2016.141
[72] Philippe Flajolet, Éric Fusy, Olivier Gandouet, and Frédéric Meunier: “ HyperLog
Log: The Analysis of a Near-Optimal Cardinality Estimation Algorithm ,” at Confer‐
ence on Analysis of Algorithms (AofA), June 2007.
[73] Jay Kreps: “ Questioning the Lambda Architecture,” oreilly.com, July 2, 2014.
[74] Ian Hellström: “ An Overview of Apache Streaming Technologies ,” database‐
line.wordpress.com, March 12, 2016.
[75] Jay Kreps: “ Why Local State Is a Fundamental Primitive in Stream Processing ,”
oreilly.com, July 31, 2014.
[76] Shay Banon: “ Percolator,” elastic.co, February 8, 2011.
[77] Alan Woodward and Martin Kleppmann: “ Real-Time Full-Text Search with
Luwak and Samza,” martin.kleppmann.com, April 13, 2015.
Summary | 485

[78] “ Apache Storm 1.0.1 Documentation,” storm.apache.org, May 2016.
[79] Tyler Akidau: “ The World Beyond Batch: Streaming 102 ,” oreilly.com, January
20, 2016.
[80] Stephan Ewen: “ Streaming Analytics with Apache Flink,” at Kafka Summit, April
2016.
[81] Tyler Akidau, Alex Balikov, Kaya Bekiroğlu, et al.: “ MillWheel: Fault-Tolerant
Stream Processing at Internet Scale ,” at 39th International Conference on Very Large
Data Bases (VLDB), August 2013.
[82] Alex Dean: “ Improving Snowplow’s Understanding of Time ,” snowplowanalyt‐
ics.com, September 15, 2015.
[83] “ Windowing (Azure Stream Analytics) ,” Microsoft Azure Reference,
msdn.microsoft.com, April 2016.
[84] “ State Management ,” Apache Samza 0.10 Documentation, samza.apache.org,
December 2015.
[85] Rajagopal Ananthanarayanan, Venkatesh Basker, Sumit Das, et al.: “ Photon:
Fault-Tolerant and Scalable Joining of Continuous Data Streams ,” at ACM Interna‐
tional Conference on Management of Data  (SIGMOD), June 2013. doi:
10.1145/2463676.2465272
[86] Martin Kleppmann: “ Samza Newsfeed Demo,” github.com, September 2014.
[87] Ben Kirwin: “ Doing the Impossible: Exactly-Once Messaging Patterns in Kafka ,”
ben.kirw.in, November 28, 2014.
[88] Pat Helland: “ Data on the Outside Versus Data on the Inside ,” at 2nd Biennial
Conference on Innovative Data Systems Research (CIDR), January 2005.
[89] Ralph Kimball and Margy Ross: The Data Warehouse Toolkit: The Definitive
Guide to Dimensional Modeling , 3rd edition. John Wiley & Sons, 2013. ISBN:
978-1-118-53080-1
[90] Viktor Klang: “ I’m coining the phrase ‘effectively-once’ for message processing
with at-least-once + idempotent operations,” twitter.com, October 20, 2016.
[91] Matei Zaharia, Tathagata Das, Haoyuan Li, et al.: “ Discretized Streams: An Effi‐
cient and Fault-Tolerant Model for Stream Processing on Large Clusters ,” at 4th
USENIX Conference in Hot Topics in Cloud Computing (HotCloud), June 2012.
[92] Kostas Tzoumas, Stephan Ewen, and Robert Metzger: “ High-Throughput, Low-
Latency, and Exactly-Once Stream Processing with Apache Flink,” data-artisans.com,
August 5, 2015.
486 | Chapter 11: Stream Processing

[93] Paris Carbone, Gyula Fóra, Stephan Ewen, et al.: “ Lightweight Asynchronous
Snapshots for Distributed Dataflows,” arXiv:1506.08603 [cs.DC], June 29, 2015.
[94] Ryan Betts and John Hugg: Fast Data: Smart and at Scale . Report, O’Reilly
Media, October 2015.
[95] Flavio Junqueira: “ Making Sense of Exactly-Once Semantics ,” at Strata+Hadoop
World London, June 2016.
[96] Jason Gustafson, Flavio Junqueira, Apurva Mehta, Sriram Subramanian, and
Guozhang Wang: “ KIP-98 – Exactly Once Delivery and Transactional Messaging ,”
cwiki.apache.org, November 2016.
[97] Pat Helland: “ Idempotence Is Not a Medical Condition,” Communications of the
ACM, volume 55, number 5, page 56, May 2012. doi:10.1145/2160718.2160734
[98] Jay Kreps: “ Re: Trying to Achieve Deterministic Behavior on Recovery/Rewind ,”
email to samza-dev mailing list, September 9, 2014.
[99] E. N. (Mootaz) Elnozahy, Lorenzo Alvisi, Yi-Min Wang, and David B. Johnson:
“ A Survey of Rollback-Recovery Protocols in Message-Passing Systems ,” ACM Com‐
puting Surveys , volume 34, number 3, pages 375–408, September 2002. doi:
10.1145/568522.568525
[100] Adam Warski: “ Kafka Streams – How Does It Fit the Stream Processing Land‐
scape?,” softwaremill.com, June 1, 2016.
Summary | 487

CHAPTER 12
The Future of Data Systems
If a thing be ordained to another as to its end, its last end cannot consist in the preservation
of its being. Hence a captain does not intend as a last end, the preservation of the ship
entrusted to him, since a ship is ordained to something else as its end, viz. to navigation.
(Often quoted as: If the highest aim of a captain was the preserve his ship, he would keep it
in port forever.)
—St. Thomas Aquinas, Summa Theologica (1265–1274)
So far, this book has been mostly about describing things as they are at present. In
this final chapter, we will shift our perspective toward the future and discuss how
things should be: I will propose some ideas and approaches that, I believe, may funda‐
mentally improve the ways we design and build applications.
Opinions and speculation about the future are of course subjective, and so I will use
the first person in this chapter when writing about my personal opinions. You are
welcome to disagree with them and form your own opinions, but I hope that the
ideas in this chapter will at least be a starting point for a productive discussion and
bring some clarity to concepts that are often confused.
The goal of this book was outlined in Chapter 1: to explore how to create applications
and systems that are reliable, scalable, and maintainable. These themes have run
through all of the chapters: for example, we discussed many fault-tolerance algo‐
rithms that help improve reliability, partitioning to improve scalability, and mecha‐
nisms for evolution and abstraction that improve maintainability. In this chapter we
will bring all of these ideas together, and build on them to envisage the future. Our
goal is to discover how to design applications that are better than the ones of today—
robust, correct, evolvable, and ultimately beneficial to humanity.
489

Data Integration
A recurring theme in this book has been that for any given problem, there are several
solutions, all of which have different pros, cons, and trade-offs. For example, when
discussing storage engines in Chapter 3, we saw log-structured storage, B-trees, and
column-oriented storage. When discussing replication in Chapter 5, we saw single-
leader, multi-leader, and leaderless approaches.
If you have a problem such as “I want to store some data and look it up again later,”
there is no one right solution, but many different approaches that are each appropri‐
ate in different circumstances. A software implementation typically has to pick one
particular approach. It’s hard enough to get one code path robust and performing
well—trying to do everything in one piece of software almost guarantees that the
implementation will be poor.
Thus, the most appropriate choice of software tool also depends on the circumstan‐
ces. Every piece of software, even a so-called “general-purpose” database, is designed
for a particular usage pattern.
Faced with this profusion of alternatives, the first challenge is then to figure out the
mapping between the software products and the circumstances in which they are a
good fit. Vendors are understandably reluctant to tell you about the kinds of work‐
loads for which their software is poorly suited, but hopefully the previous chapters
have equipped you with some questions to ask in order to read between the lines and
better understand the trade-offs.
However, even if you perfectly understand the mapping between tools and circum‐
stances for their use, there is another challenge: in complex applications, data is often
used in several different ways. There is unlikely to be one piece of software that is
suitable for all the different circumstances in which the data is used, so you inevitably
end up having to cobble together several different pieces of software in order to pro‐
vide your application’s functionality.
Combining Specialized Tools by Deriving Data
For example, it is common to need to integrate an OLTP database with a full-text
search index in order to handle queries for arbitrary keywords. Although some data‐
bases (such as PostgreSQL) include a full-text indexing feature, which can be suffi‐
cient for simple applications [1], more sophisticated search facilities require specialist
information retrieval tools. Conversely, search indexes are generally not very suitable
as a durable system of record, and so many applications need to combine two differ‐
ent tools in order to satisfy all of the requirements.
We touched on the issue of integrating data systems in “Keeping Systems in Sync”  on
page 452. As the number of different representations of the data increases, the inte‐
490 | Chapter 12: The Future of Data Systems

gration problem becomes harder. Besides the database and the search index, perhaps
you need to keep copies of the data in analytics systems (data warehouses, or batch
and stream processing systems); maintain caches or denormalized versions of objects
that were derived from the original data; pass the data through machine learning,
classification, ranking, or recommendation systems; or send notifications based on
changes to the data.
Surprisingly often I see software engineers make statements like, “In my experience,
99% of people only need X” or “…don’t need X” (for various values of X). I think that
such statements say more about the experience of the speaker than about the actual
usefulness of a technology. The range of different things you might want to do with
data is dizzyingly wide. What one person considers to be an obscure and pointless
feature may well be a central requirement for someone else. The need for data inte‐
gration often only becomes apparent if you zoom out and consider the dataflows
across an entire organization.
Reasoning about dataflows
When copies of the same data need to be maintained in several storage systems in
order to satisfy different access patterns, you need to be very clear about the inputs
and outputs: where is data written first, and which representations are derived from
which sources? How do you get data into all the right places, in the right formats?
For example, you might arrange for data to first be written to a system of record data‐
base, capturing the changes made to that database (see “Change Data Capture” on
page 454) and then applying the changes to the search index in the same order. If
change data capture (CDC) is the only way of updating the index, you can be confi‐
dent that the index is entirely derived from the system of record, and therefore con‐
sistent with it (barring bugs in the software). Writing to the database is the only way
of supplying new input into this system.
Allowing the application to directly write to both the search index and the database
introduces the problem shown in Figure 11-4, in which two clients concurrently send
conflicting writes, and the two storage systems process them in a different order. In
this case, neither the database nor the search index is “in charge” of determining the
order of writes, and so they may make contradictory decisions and become perma‐
nently inconsistent with each other.
If it is possible for you to funnel all user input through a single system that decides on
an ordering for all writes, it becomes much easier to derive other representations of
the data by processing the writes in the same order. This is an application of the state
machine replication approach that we saw in “Total Order Broadcast”  on page 348.
Whether you use change data capture or an event sourcing log is less important than
simply the principle of deciding on a total order.
Data Integration | 491

Updating a derived data system based on an event log can often be made determinis‐
tic and idempotent (see “Idempotence”  on page 478), making it quite easy to recover
from faults.
Derived data versus distributed transactions
The classic approach for keeping different data systems consistent with each other
involves distributed transactions, as discussed in “Atomic Commit and Two-Phase
Commit (2PC)” on page 354. How does the approach of using derived data systems
fare in comparison to distributed transactions?
At an abstract level, they achieve a similar goal by different means. Distributed trans‐
actions decide on an ordering of writes by using locks for mutual exclusion (see
“Two-Phase Locking (2PL)” on page 257), while CDC and event sourcing use a log
for ordering. Distributed transactions use atomic commit to ensure that changes take
effect exactly once, while log-based systems are often based on deterministic retry
and idempotence.
The biggest difference is that transaction systems usually provide linearizability (see
“Linearizability”  on page 324), which implies useful guarantees such as reading your
own writes (see “Reading Your Own Writes” on page 162). On the other hand,
derived data systems are often updated asynchronously, and so they do not by default
offer the same timing guarantees.
Within limited environments that are willing to pay the cost of distributed transac‐
tions, they have been used successfully. However, I think that XA has poor fault toler‐
ance and performance characteristics (see “Distributed Transactions in Practice”  on
page 360), which severely limit its usefulness. I believe that it might be possible to
create a better protocol for distributed transactions, but getting such a protocol
widely adopted and integrated with existing tools would be challenging, and unlikely
to happen soon.
In the absence of widespread support for a good distributed transaction protocol, I
believe that log-based derived data is the most promising approach for integrating
different data systems. However, guarantees such as reading your own writes are use‐
ful, and I don’t think that it is productive to tell everyone “eventual consistency is
inevitable—suck it up and learn to deal with it” (at least not without good guidance
on how to deal with it).
In “Aiming for Correctness”  on page 515 we will discuss some approaches for imple‐
menting stronger guarantees on top of asynchronously derived systems, and work
toward a middle ground between distributed transactions and asynchronous log-
based systems.
492 | Chapter 12: The Future of Data Systems

The limits of total ordering
With systems that are small enough, constructing a totally ordered event log is
entirely feasible (as demonstrated by the popularity of databases with single-leader
replication, which construct precisely such a log). However, as systems are scaled
toward bigger and more complex workloads, limitations begin to emerge:
• In most cases, constructing a totally ordered log requires all events to pass
through a single leader node  that decides on the ordering. If the throughput of
events is greater than a single machine can handle, you need to partition it across
multiple machines (see “Partitioned Logs” on page 446). The order of events in
two different partitions is then ambiguous.
• If the servers are spread across multiple geographically distributed  datacenters,
for example in order to tolerate an entire datacenter going offline, you typically
have a separate leader in each datacenter, because network delays make synchro‐
nous cross-datacenter coordination inefficient (see “Multi-Leader Replication”
on page 168). This implies an undefined ordering of events that originate in two
different datacenters.
• When applications are deployed as microservices (see “Dataflow Through Serv‐
ices: REST and RPC” on page 131), a common design choice is to deploy each
service and its durable state as an independent unit, with no durable state shared
between services. When two events originate in different services, there is no
defined order for those events.
• Some applications maintain client-side state that is updated immediately on user
input (without waiting for confirmation from a server), and even continue to
work offline (see “Clients with offline operation” on page 170). With such appli‐
cations, clients and servers are very likely to see events in different orders.
In formal terms, deciding on a total order of events is known as total order broadcast,
which is equivalent to consensus (see “Consensus algorithms and total order broad‐
cast”  on page 366). Most consensus algorithms are designed for situations in which
the throughput of a single node is sufficient to process the entire stream of events,
and these algorithms do not provide a mechanism for multiple nodes to share the
work of ordering the events. It is still an open research problem to design consensus
algorithms that can scale beyond the throughput of a single node and that work well
in a geographically distributed setting.
Ordering events to capture causality
In cases where there is no causal link between events, the lack of a total order is not a
big problem, since concurrent events can be ordered arbitrarily. Some other cases are
easy to handle: for example, when there are multiple updates of the same object, they
can be totally ordered by routing all updates for a particular object ID to the same log
Data Integration | 493

partition. However, causal dependencies sometimes arise in more subtle ways (see
also “Ordering and Causality” on page 339 ).
For example, consider a social networking service, and two users who were in a rela‐
tionship but have just broken up. One of the users removes the other as a friend, and
then sends a message to their remaining friends complaining about their ex-partner.
The user’s intention is that their ex-partner should not see the rude message, since
the message was sent after the friend status was revoked.
However, in a system that stores friendship status in one place and messages in
another place, that ordering dependency between the unfriend event and the message-
send event may be lost. If the causal dependency is not captured, a service that sends
notifications about new messages may process the message-send event before the
unfriend event, and thus incorrectly send a notification to the ex-partner.
In this example, the notifications are effectively a join between the messages and the
friend list, making it related to the timing issues of joins that we discussed previously
(see “Time-dependence of joins” on page 475 ). Unfortunately, there does not seem to
be a simple answer to this problem [2, 3]. Starting points include: 
• Logical timestamps can provide total ordering without coordination (see
“Sequence Number Ordering” on page 343), so they may help in cases where
total order broadcast is not feasible. However, they still require recipients to han‐
dle events that are delivered out of order, and they require additional metadata to
be passed around.
• If you can log an event to record the state of the system that the user saw before
making a decision, and give that event a unique identifier, then any later events
can reference that event identifier in order to record the causal dependency [ 4].
We will return to this idea in “Reads are events too” on page 513 .
• Conflict resolution algorithms (see “Automatic Conflict Resolution” on page
174) help with processing events that are delivered in an unexpected order. They
are useful for maintaining state, but they do not help if actions have external side
effects (such as sending a notification to a user).
Perhaps, over time, patterns for application development will emerge that allow
causal dependencies to be captured efficiently, and derived state to be maintained
correctly, without forcing all events to go through the bottleneck of total order
broadcast. 
Batch and Stream Processing
I would say that the goal of data integration is to make sure that data ends up in the
right form in all the right places. Doing so requires consuming inputs, transforming,
joining, filtering, aggregating, training models, evaluating, and eventually writing to
494 | Chapter 12: The Future of Data Systems

the appropriate outputs. Batch and stream processors are the tools for achieving this
goal.
The outputs of batch and stream processes are derived datasets such as search
indexes, materialized views, recommendations to show to users, aggregate metrics,
and so on (see “The Output of Batch Workflows” on page 411 and “Uses of Stream
Processing” on page 465 ).
As we saw in Chapter 10 and Chapter 11, batch and stream processing have a lot of
principles in common, and the main fundamental difference is that stream process‐
ors operate on unbounded datasets whereas batch process inputs are of a known,
finite size. There are also many detailed differences in the ways the processing
engines are implemented, but these distinctions are beginning to blur.
Spark performs stream processing on top of a batch processing engine by breaking
the stream into microbatches, whereas Apache Flink performs batch processing on
top of a stream processing engine [ 5]. In principle, one type of processing can be
emulated on top of the other, although the performance characteristics vary: for
example, microbatching may perform poorly on hopping or sliding windows [6].
Maintaining derived state
Batch processing has a quite strong functional flavor (even if the code is not written
in a functional programming language): it encourages deterministic, pure functions
whose output depends only on the input and which have no side effects other than
the explicit outputs, treating inputs as immutable and outputs as append-only.
Stream processing is similar, but it extends operators to allow managed, fault-tolerant
state (see “Rebuilding state after a failure” on page 478 ).
The principle of deterministic functions with well-defined inputs and outputs is not
only good for fault tolerance (see “Idempotence”  on page 478), but also simplifies
reasoning about the dataflows in an organization [ 7]. No matter whether the derived
data is a search index, a statistical model, or a cache, it is helpful to think in terms of
data pipelines that derive one thing from another, pushing state changes in one sys‐
tem through functional application code and applying the effects to derived systems.
In principle, derived data systems could be maintained synchronously, just like a
relational database updates secondary indexes synchronously within the same trans‐
action as writes to the table being indexed. However, asynchrony is what makes sys‐
tems based on event logs robust: it allows a fault in one part of the system to be
contained locally, whereas distributed transactions abort if any one participant fails,
so they tend to amplify failures by spreading them to the rest of the system (see “Lim‐
itations of distributed transactions” on page 363 ).
We saw in “Partitioning and Secondary Indexes”  on page 206 that secondary indexes
often cross partition boundaries. A partitioned system with secondary indexes either
Data Integration | 495

needs to send writes to multiple partitions (if the index is term-partitioned) or send
reads to all partitions (if the index is document-partitioned). Such cross-partition
communication is also most reliable and scalable if the index is maintained asynchro‐
nously [8] (see also “Multi-partition data processing” on page 514 ).
Reprocessing data for application evolution
When maintaining derived data, batch and stream processing are both useful. Stream
processing allows changes in the input to be reflected in derived views with low delay,
whereas batch processing allows large amounts of accumulated historical data to be
reprocessed in order to derive new views onto an existing dataset.
In particular, reprocessing existing data provides a good mechanism for maintaining
a system, evolving it to support new features and changed requirements (see Chap‐
ter 4 ). Without reprocessing, schema evolution is limited to simple changes like
adding a new optional field to a record, or adding a new type of record. This is the
case both in a schema-on-write and in a schema-on-read context (see “Schema flexi‐
bility in the document model”  on page 39). On the other hand, with reprocessing it is
possible to restructure a dataset into a completely different model in order to better
serve new requirements.
Schema Migrations on Railways
Large-scale “schema migrations” occur in noncomputer systems as well. For example,
in the early days of railway building in 19th-century England there were various com‐
peting standards for the gauge (the distance between the two rails). Trains built for
one gauge couldn’t run on tracks of another gauge, which restricted the possible
interconnections in the train network [9].
After a single standard gauge was finally decided upon in 1846, tracks with other
gauges had to be converted—but how do you do this without shutting down the train
line for months or years? The solution is to first convert the track to dual gauge or
mixed gauge by adding a third rail. This conversion can be done gradually, and when
it is done, trains of both gauges can run on the line, using two of the three rails. Even‐
tually, once all trains have been converted to the standard gauge, the rail providing
the nonstandard gauge can be removed.
“Reprocessing” the existing tracks in this way, and allowing the old and new versions
to exist side by side, makes it possible to change the gauge gradually over the course
of years. Nevertheless, it is an expensive undertaking, which is why nonstandard
gauges still exist today. For example, the BART system in the San Francisco Bay Area
uses a different gauge from the majority of the US.
496 | Chapter 12: The Future of Data Systems

Derived views allow gradual evolution. If you want to restructure a dataset, you do
not need to perform the migration as a sudden switch. Instead, you can maintain the
old schema and the new schema side by side as two independently derived views onto
the same underlying data. You can then start shifting a small number of users to the
new view in order to test its performance and find any bugs, while most users con‐
tinue to be routed to the old view. Gradually, you can increase the proportion of
users accessing the new view, and eventually you can drop the old view [10].
The beauty of such a gradual migration is that every stage of the process is easily
reversible if something goes wrong: you always have a working system to go back to.
By reducing the risk of irreversible damage, you can be more confident about going
ahead, and thus move faster to improve your system [11].
The lambda architecture
If batch processing is used to reprocess historical data, and stream processing is used
to process recent updates, then how do you combine the two? The lambda architec‐
ture [12] is a proposal in this area that has gained a lot of attention.
The core idea of the lambda architecture is that incoming data should be recorded by
appending immutable events to an always-growing dataset, similarly to event sourc‐
ing (see “Event Sourcing” on page 457). From these events, read-optimized views are
derived. The lambda architecture proposes running two different systems in parallel:
a batch processing system such as Hadoop MapReduce, and a separate stream-
processing system such as Storm.
In the lambda approach, the stream processor consumes the events and quickly pro‐
duces an approximate update to the view; the batch processor later consumes the
same set of events and produces a corrected version of the derived view. The reason‐
ing behind this design is that batch processing is simpler and thus less prone to bugs,
while stream processors are thought to be less reliable and harder to make fault-
tolerant (see “Fault Tolerance” on page 476). Moreover, the stream process can use
fast approximate algorithms while the batch process uses slower exact algorithms.
The lambda architecture was an influential idea that shaped the design of data sys‐
tems for the better, particularly by popularizing the principle of deriving views onto
streams of immutable events and reprocessing events when needed. However, I also
think that it has a number of practical problems:
• Having to maintain the same logic to run both in a batch and in a stream pro‐
cessing framework is significant additional effort. Although libraries such as
Summingbird [ 13] provide an abstraction for computations that can be run in
either a batch or a streaming context, the operational complexity of debugging,
tuning, and maintaining two different systems remains [14].
Data Integration | 497

• Since the stream pipeline and the batch pipeline produce separate outputs, they
need to be merged in order to respond to user requests. This merge is fairly easy
if the computation is a simple aggregation over a tumbling window, but it
becomes significantly harder if the view is derived using more complex opera‐
tions such as joins and sessionization, or if the output is not a time series.
• Although it is great to have the ability to reprocess the entire historical dataset,
doing so frequently is expensive on large datasets. Thus, the batch pipeline often
needs to be set up to process incremental batches (e.g., an hour’s worth of data at
the end of every hour) rather than reprocessing everything. This raises the prob‐
lems discussed in “Reasoning About Time” on page 468, such as handling strag‐
glers and handling windows that cross boundaries between batches.
Incrementalizing a batch computation adds complexity, making it more akin to
the streaming layer, which runs counter to the goal of keeping the batch layer as
simple as possible.
Unifying batch and stream processing
More recent work has enabled the benefits of the lambda architecture to be enjoyed
without its downsides, by allowing both batch computations (reprocessing historical
data) and stream computations (processing events as they arrive) to be implemented
in the same system [15].
Unifying batch and stream processing in one system requires the following features,
which are becoming increasingly widely available:
• The ability to replay historical events through the same processing engine that
handles the stream of recent events. For example, log-based message brokers
have the ability to replay messages (see “Replaying old messages” on page 451),
and some stream processors can read input from a distributed filesystem like
HDFS.
• Exactly-once semantics for stream processors—that is, ensuring that the output
is the same as if no faults had occurred, even if faults did in fact occur (see “Fault
Tolerance” on page 476). Like with batch processing, this requires discarding the
partial output of any failed tasks.
• Tools for windowing by event time, not by processing time, since processing
time is meaningless when reprocessing historical events (see “Reasoning About
Time”  on page 468). For example, Apache Beam provides an API for expressing
such computations, which can then be run using Apache Flink or Google Cloud
Dataflow. 
498 | Chapter 12: The Future of Data Systems

Unbundling Databases
At a most abstract level, databases, Hadoop, and operating systems all perform the
same functions: they store some data, and they allow you to process and query that
data [16]. A database stores data in records of some data model (rows in tables, docu‐
ments, vertices in a graph, etc.) while an operating system’s filesystem stores data in
files—but at their core, both are “information management” systems [ 17]. As we saw
in Chapter 10, the Hadoop ecosystem is somewhat like a distributed version of Unix.
Of course, there are many practical differences. For example, many filesystems do not
cope very well with a directory containing 10 million small files, whereas a database
containing 10 million small records is completely normal and unremarkable. Never‐
theless, the similarities and differences between operating systems and databases are
worth exploring.
Unix and relational databases have approached the information management prob‐
lem with very different philosophies. Unix viewed its purpose as presenting program‐
mers with a logical but fairly low-level hardware abstraction, whereas relational
databases wanted to give application programmers a high-level abstraction that
would hide the complexities of data structures on disk, concurrency, crash recovery,
and so on. Unix developed pipes and files that are just sequences of bytes, whereas
databases developed SQL and transactions.
Which approach is better? Of course, it depends what you want. Unix is “simpler” in
the sense that it is a fairly thin wrapper around hardware resources; relational data‐
bases are “simpler” in the sense that a short declarative query can draw on a lot of
powerful infrastructure (query optimization, indexes, join methods, concurrency
control, replication, etc.) without the author of the query needing to understand the
implementation details.
The tension between these philosophies has lasted for decades (both Unix and the
relational model emerged in the early 1970s) and still isn’t resolved. For example, I
would interpret the NoSQL movement as wanting to apply a Unix-esque approach of
low-level abstractions to the domain of distributed OLTP data storage.
In this section I will attempt to reconcile the two philosophies, in the hope that we
can combine the best of both worlds.
Composing Data Storage Technologies
Over the course of this book we have discussed various features provided by data‐
bases and how they work, including:
• Secondary indexes, which allow you to efficiently search for records based on the
value of a field (see “Other Indexing Structures” on page 85 )
Unbundling Databases | 499

• Materialized views, which are a kind of precomputed cache of query results (see
“Aggregation: Data Cubes and Materialized Views” on page 101 )
• Replication logs, which keep copies of the data on other nodes up to date (see
“Implementation of Replication Logs” on page 158 )
• Full-text search indexes, which allow keyword search in text (see “Full-text
search and fuzzy indexes” on page 88) and which are built into some relational
databases [1]
In Chapters 10 and 11, similar themes emerged. We talked about building full-text
search indexes (see “The Output of Batch Workflows” on page 411), about material‐
ized view maintenance (see “Maintaining materialized views” on page 467), and
about replicating changes from a database to derived data systems (see “Change Data
Capture” on page 454 ).
It seems that there are parallels between the features that are built into databases and
the derived data systems that people are building with batch and stream processors.
Creating an index
Think about what happens when you run CREATE INDEX to create a new index in a
relational database. The database has to scan over a consistent snapshot of a table,
pick out all of the field values being indexed, sort them, and write out the index. Then
it must process the backlog of writes that have been made since the consistent snap‐
shot was taken (assuming the table was not locked while creating the index, so writes
could continue). Once that is done, the database must continue to keep the index up
to date whenever a transaction writes to the table.
This process is remarkably similar to setting up a new follower replica (see “Setting
Up New Followers”  on page 155), and also very similar to bootstrapping change data
capture in a streaming system (see “Initial snapshot” on page 455 ).
Whenever you run CREATE INDEX , the database essentially reprocesses the existing
dataset (as discussed in “Reprocessing data for application evolution”  on page 496)
and derives the index as a new view onto the existing data. The existing data may be a
snapshot of the state rather than a log of all changes that ever happened, but the two
are closely related (see “State, Streams, and Immutability” on page 459 ).
The meta-database of everything
In this light, I think that the dataflow across an entire organization starts looking like
one huge database [ 7]. Whenever a batch, stream, or ETL process transports data
from one place and form to another place and form, it is acting like the database sub‐
system that keeps indexes or materialized views up to date.
500 | Chapter 12: The Future of Data Systems

Viewed like this, batch and stream processors are like elaborate implementations of
triggers, stored procedures, and materialized view maintenance routines. The derived
data systems they maintain are like different index types. For example, a relational
database may support B-tree indexes, hash indexes, spatial indexes (see “Multi-
column indexes” on page 87), and other types of indexes. In the emerging architec‐
ture of derived data systems, instead of implementing those facilities as features of a
single integrated database product, they are provided by various different pieces of
software, running on different machines, administered by different teams.
Where will these developments take us in the future? If we start from the premise
that there is no single data model or storage format that is suitable for all access pat‐
terns, I speculate that there are two avenues by which different storage and process‐
ing tools can nevertheless be composed into a cohesive system:
Federated databases: unifying reads
It is possible to provide a unified query interface to a wide variety of underlying
storage engines and processing methods—an approach known as a federated
database or polystore [18, 19]. For example, PostgreSQL’s foreign data wrapper
feature fits this pattern [ 20]. Applications that need a specialized data model or
query interface can still access the underlying storage engines directly, while
users who want to combine data from disparate places can do so easily through
the federated interface.
A federated query interface follows the relational tradition of a single integrated
system with a high-level query language and elegant semantics, but a compli‐
cated implementation.
Unbundled databases: unifying writes
While federation addresses read-only querying across several different systems, it
does not have a good answer to synchronizing writes across those systems. We
said that within a single database, creating a consistent index is a built-in feature.
When we compose several storage systems, we similarly need to ensure that all
data changes end up in all the right places, even in the face of faults. Making it
easier to reliably plug together storage systems (e.g., through change data capture
and event logs) is like unbundling a database’s index-maintenance features in a
way that can synchronize writes across disparate technologies [7, 21].
The unbundled approach follows the Unix tradition of small tools that do one
thing well [22], that communicate through a uniform low-level API (pipes), and
that can be composed using a higher-level language (the shell) [16].
Making unbundling work
Federation and unbundling are two sides of the same coin: composing a reliable, scal‐
able, and maintainable system out of diverse components. Federated read-only
Unbundling Databases | 501

querying requires mapping one data model into another, which takes some thought
but is ultimately quite a manageable problem. I think that keeping the writes to sev‐
eral storage systems in sync is the harder engineering problem, and so I will focus
on it.
The traditional approach to synchronizing writes requires distributed transactions
across heterogeneous storage systems [ 18], which I think is the wrong solution (see
“Derived data versus distributed transactions” on page 492). Transactions within a
single storage or stream processing system are feasible, but when data crosses the
boundary between different technologies, I believe that an asynchronous event log
with idempotent writes is a much more robust and practical approach.
For example, distributed transactions are used within some stream processors to ach‐
ieve exactly-once semantics (see “Atomic commit revisited” on page 477), and this
can work quite well. However, when a transaction would need to involve systems
written by different groups of people (e.g., when data is written from a stream pro‐
cessor to a distributed key-value store or search index), the lack of a standardized
transaction protocol makes integration much harder. An ordered log of events with
idempotent consumers (see “Idempotence”  on page 478) is a much simpler abstrac‐
tion, and thus much more feasible to implement across heterogeneous systems [7].
The big advantage of log-based integration is loose coupling between the various com‐
ponents, which manifests itself in two ways:
1. At a system level, asynchronous event streams make the system as a whole more
robust to outages or performance degradation of individual components. If a
consumer runs slow or fails, the event log can buffer messages (see “Disk space
usage” on page 450 ), allowing the producer and any other consumers to continue
running unaffected. The faulty consumer can catch up when it is fixed, so it
doesn’t miss any data, and the fault is contained. By contrast, the synchronous
interaction of distributed transactions tends to escalate local faults into large-
scale failures (see “Limitations of distributed transactions” on page 363 ).
2. At a human level, unbundling data systems allows different software components
and services to be developed, improved, and maintained independently from
each other by different teams. Specialization allows each team to focus on doing
one thing well, with well-defined interfaces to other teams’ systems. Event logs
provide an interface that is powerful enough to capture fairly strong consistency
properties (due to durability and ordering of events), but also general enough to
be applicable to almost any kind of data.
Unbundled versus integrated systems
If unbundling does indeed become the way of the future, it will not replace databases
in their current form—they will still be needed as much as ever. Databases are still
502 | Chapter 12: The Future of Data Systems

required for maintaining state in stream processors, and in order to serve queries for
the output of batch and stream processors (see “The Output of Batch Workflows”  on
page 411 and “Processing Streams” on page 464). Specialized query engines will con‐
tinue to be important for particular workloads: for example, query engines in MPP
data warehouses are optimized for exploratory analytic queries and handle this kind
of workload very well (see “Comparing Hadoop to Distributed Databases” on page
414).
The complexity of running several different pieces of infrastructure can be a problem:
each piece of software has a learning curve, configuration issues, and operational
quirks, and so it is worth deploying as few moving parts as possible. A single integra‐
ted software product may also be able to achieve better and more predictable perfor‐
mance on the kinds of workloads for which it is designed, compared to a system
consisting of several tools that you have composed with application code [ 23]. As I
said in the Preface, building for scale that you don’t need is wasted effort and may
lock you into an inflexible design. In effect, it is a form of premature optimization.
The goal of unbundling is not to compete with individual databases on performance
for particular workloads; the goal is to allow you to combine several different data‐
bases in order to achieve good performance for a much wider range of workloads
than is possible with a single piece of software. It’s about breadth, not depth—in the
same vein as the diversity of storage and processing models that we discussed in
“Comparing Hadoop to Distributed Databases” on page 414 .
Thus, if there is a single technology that does everything you need, you’re most likely
best off simply using that product rather than trying to reimplement it yourself from
lower-level components. The advantages of unbundling and composition only come
into the picture when there is no single piece of software that satisfies all your
requirements.
What’s missing?
The tools for composing data systems are getting better, but I think one major part is
missing: we don’t yet have the unbundled-database equivalent of the Unix shell (i.e., a
high-level language for composing storage and processing systems in a simple and
declarative way).
For example, I would love it if we could simply declare mysql | elasticsearch , by
analogy to Unix pipes [ 22], which would be the unbundled equivalent of CREATE
INDEX: it would take all the documents in a MySQL database and index them in an
Elasticsearch cluster. It would then continually capture all the changes made to the
database and automatically apply them to the search index, without us having to
write custom application code. This kind of integration should be possible with
almost any kind of storage or indexing system.
Unbundling Databases | 503

Similarly, it would be great to be able to precompute and update caches more easily.
Recall that a materialized view is essentially a precomputed cache, so you could imag‐
ine creating a cache by declaratively specifying materialized views for complex quer‐
ies, including recursive queries on graphs (see “Graph-Like Data Models”  on page
49) and application logic. There is interesting early-stage research in this area, such as
differential dataflow [24, 25], and I hope that these ideas will find their way into pro‐
duction systems. 
Designing Applications Around Dataflow
The approach of unbundling databases by composing specialized storage and pro‐
cessing systems with application code is also becoming known as the “database
inside-out” approach [ 26], after the title of a conference talk I gave in 2014 [ 27].
However, calling it a “new architecture” is too grandiose. I see it more as a design
pattern, a starting point for discussion, and we give it a name simply so that we can
better talk about it.
These ideas are not mine; they are simply an amalgamation of other people’s ideas
from which I think we should learn. In particular, there is a lot of overlap with data‐
flow languages such as Oz [28] and Juttle [29], functional reactive programming (FRP)
languages such as Elm [30, 31], and logic programming languages such as Bloom [32].
The term unbundling in this context was proposed by Jay Kreps [7].
Even spreadsheets have dataflow programming capabilities that are miles ahead of
most mainstream programming languages [ 33]. In a spreadsheet, you can put a for‐
mula in one cell (for example, the sum of cells in another column), and whenever any
input to the formula changes, the result of the formula is automatically recalculated.
This is exactly what we want at a data system level: when a record in a database
changes, we want any index for that record to be automatically updated, and any
cached views or aggregations that depend on the record to be automatically
refreshed. You should not have to worry about the technical details of how this
refresh happens, but be able to simply trust that it works correctly.
Thus, I think that most data systems still have something to learn from the features
that VisiCalc already had in 1979 [ 34]. The difference from spreadsheets is that
today’s data systems need to be fault-tolerant, scalable, and store data durably. They
also need to be able to integrate disparate technologies written by different groups of
people over time, and reuse existing libraries and services: it is unrealistic to expect all
software to be developed using one particular language, framework, or tool.
In this section I will expand on these ideas and explore some ways of building appli‐
cations around the ideas of unbundled databases and dataflow.
504 | Chapter 12: The Future of Data Systems

Application code as a derivation function
When one dataset is derived from another, it goes through some kind of transforma‐
tion function. For example:
• A secondary index is a kind of derived dataset with a straightforward transforma‐
tion function: for each row or document in the base table, it picks out the values
in the columns or fields being indexed, and sorts by those values (assuming a B-
tree or SSTable index, which are sorted by key, as discussed in Chapter 3).
• A full-text search index is created by applying various natural language process‐
ing functions such as language detection, word segmentation, stemming or lem‐
matization, spelling correction, and synonym identification, followed by building
a data structure for efficient lookups (such as an inverted index).
• In a machine learning system, we can consider the model as being derived from
the training data by applying various feature extraction and statistical analysis
functions. When the model is applied to new input data, the output of the model
is derived from the input and the model (and hence, indirectly, from the training
data).
• A cache often contains an aggregation of data in the form in which it is going to
be displayed in a user interface (UI). Populating the cache thus requires knowl‐
edge of what fields are referenced in the UI; changes in the UI may require
updating the definition of how the cache is populated and rebuilding the cache.
The derivation function for a secondary index is so commonly required that it is built
into many databases as a core feature, and you can invoke it by merely saying CREATE
INDEX. For full-text indexing, basic linguistic features for common languages may be
built into a database, but the more sophisticated features often require domain-
specific tuning. In machine learning, feature engineering is notoriously application-
specific, and often has to incorporate detailed knowledge about the user interaction
and deployment of an application [35].
When the function that creates a derived dataset is not a standard cookie-cutter func‐
tion like creating a secondary index, custom code is required to handle the
application-specific aspects. And this custom code is where many databases struggle.
Although relational databases commonly support triggers, stored procedures, and
user-defined functions, which can be used to execute application code within the
database, they have been somewhat of an afterthought in database design (see
“Transmitting Event Streams” on page 440 ).
Separation of application code and state
In theory, databases could be deployment environments for arbitrary application
code, like an operating system. However, in practice they have turned out to be
Unbundling Databases | 505

i. Explaining a joke rarely improves it, but I don’t want anyone to feel left out. Here, Church is a reference to
the mathematician Alonzo Church, who created the lambda calculus, an early form of computation that is the
basis for most functional programming languages. The lambda calculus has no mutable state (i.e., no vari‐
ables that can be overwritten), so one could say that mutable state is separate from Church’s work.
poorly suited for this purpose. They do not fit well with the requirements of modern
application development, such as dependency and package management, version
control, rolling upgrades, evolvability, monitoring, metrics, calls to network services,
and integration with external systems.
On the other hand, deployment and cluster management tools such as Mesos, YARN,
Docker, Kubernetes, and others are designed specifically for the purpose of running
application code. By focusing on doing one thing well, they are able to do it much
better than a database that provides execution of user-defined functions as one of its
many features.
I think it makes sense to have some parts of a system that specialize in durable data
storage, and other parts that specialize in running application code. The two can
interact while still remaining independent.
Most web applications today are deployed as stateless services, in which any user
request can be routed to any application server, and the server forgets everything
about the request once it has sent the response. This style of deployment is conve‐
nient, as servers can be added or removed at will, but the state has to go somewhere:
typically, a database. The trend has been to keep stateless application logic separate
from state management (databases): not putting application logic in the database and
not putting persistent state in the application [ 36]. As people in the functional pro‐
gramming community like to joke, “We believe in the separation of Church and
state” [ 37].i
In this typical web application model, the database acts as a kind of mutable shared
variable that can be accessed synchronously over the network. The application can
read and update the variable, and the database takes care of making it durable, pro‐
viding some concurrency control and fault tolerance.
However, in most programming languages you cannot subscribe to changes in a
mutable variable—you can only read it periodically. Unlike in a spreadsheet, readers
of the variable don’t get notified if the value of the variable changes. (You can imple‐
ment such notifications in your own code—this is known as the observer pattern—
but most languages do not have this pattern as a built-in feature.)
Databases have inherited this passive approach to mutable data: if you want to find
out whether the content of the database has changed, often your only option is to poll
(i.e., to repeat your query periodically). Subscribing to changes is only just beginning
to emerge as a feature (see “API support for change streams” on page 456 ).
506 | Chapter 12: The Future of Data Systems

Dataflow: Interplay between state changes and application code
Thinking about applications in terms of dataflow implies renegotiating the relation‐
ship between application code and state management. Instead of treating a database
as a passive variable that is manipulated by the application, we think much more
about the interplay and collaboration between state, state changes, and code that pro‐
cesses them. Application code responds to state changes in one place by triggering
state changes in another place.
We saw this line of thinking in “Databases and Streams” on page 451, where we dis‐
cussed treating the log of changes to a database as a stream of events that we can sub‐
scribe to. Message-passing systems such as actors (see “Message-Passing Dataflow”
on page 136) also have this concept of responding to events. Already in the 1980s, the
tuple spaces  model explored expressing distributed computations in terms of pro‐
cesses that observe state changes and react to them [38, 39].
As discussed, similar things happen inside a database when a trigger fires due to a
data change, or when a secondary index is updated to reflect a change in the table
being indexed. Unbundling the database means taking this idea and applying it to the
creation of derived datasets outside of the primary database: caches, full-text search
indexes, machine learning, or analytics systems. We can use stream processing and
messaging systems for this purpose.
The important thing to keep in mind is that maintaining derived data is not the same
as asynchronous job execution, for which messaging systems are traditionally
designed (see “Logs compared to traditional messaging” on page 448 ):
• When maintaining derived data, the order of state changes is often important (if
several views are derived from an event log, they need to process the events in the
same order so that they remain consistent with each other). As discussed in
“Acknowledgments and redelivery” on page 445, many message brokers do not
have this property when redelivering unacknowledged messages. Dual writes are
also ruled out (see “Keeping Systems in Sync” on page 452 ).
• Fault tolerance is key for derived data: losing just a single message causes the
derived dataset to go permanently out of sync with its data source. Both message
delivery and derived state updates must be reliable. For example, many actor sys‐
tems by default maintain actor state and messages in memory, so they are lost if
the machine running the actor crashes.
Stable message ordering and fault-tolerant message processing are quite stringent
demands, but they are much less expensive and more operationally robust than dis‐
tributed transactions. Modern stream processors can provide these ordering and reli‐
ability guarantees at scale, and they allow application code to be run as stream
operators.
Unbundling Databases | 507

ii. In the microservices approach, you could avoid the synchronous network request by caching the exchange
rate locally in the service that processes the purchase. However, in order to keep that cache fresh, you would
need to periodically poll for updated exchange rates, or subscribe to a stream of changes—which is exactly
what happens in the dataflow approach.
This application code can do the arbitrary processing that built-in derivation func‐
tions in databases generally don’t provide. Like Unix tools chained by pipes, stream
operators can be composed to build large systems around dataflow. Each operator
takes streams of state changes as input, and produces other streams of state changes
as output.
Stream processors and services
The currently trendy style of application development involves breaking down func‐
tionality into a set of services that communicate via synchronous network requests
such as REST APIs (see “Dataflow Through Services: REST and RPC” on page 131).
The advantage of such a service-oriented architecture over a single monolithic appli‐
cation is primarily organizational scalability through loose coupling: different teams
can work on different services, which reduces coordination effort between teams (as
long as the services can be deployed and updated independently).
Composing stream operators into dataflow systems has a lot of similar characteristics
to the microservices approach [40]. However, the underlying communication mecha‐
nism is very different: one-directional, asynchronous message streams rather than
synchronous request/response interactions.
Besides the advantages listed in “Message-Passing Dataflow”  on page 136, such as
better fault tolerance, dataflow systems can also achieve better performance. For
example, say a customer is purchasing an item that is priced in one currency but paid
for in another currency. In order to perform the currency conversion, you need to
know the current exchange rate. This operation could be implemented in two ways
[40, 41]:
1. In the microservices approach, the code that processes the purchase would prob‐
ably query an exchange-rate service or database in order to obtain the current
rate for a particular currency.
2. In the dataflow approach, the code that processes purchases would subscribe to a
stream of exchange rate updates ahead of time, and record the current rate in a
local database whenever it changes. When it comes to processing the purchase, it
only needs to query the local database.
The second approach has replaced a synchronous network request to another service
with a query to a local database (which may be on the same machine, even in the
same process).ii Not only is the dataflow approach faster, but it is also more robust to
508 | Chapter 12: The Future of Data Systems

the failure of another service. The fastest and most reliable network request is no net‐
work request at all! Instead of RPC, we now have a stream join between purchase
events and exchange rate update events (see “Stream-table join (stream enrichment)”
on page 473).
The join is time-dependent: if the purchase events are reprocessed at a later point in
time, the exchange rate will have changed. If you want to reconstruct the original out‐
put, you will need to obtain the historical exchange rate at the original time of pur‐
chase. No matter whether you query a service or subscribe to a stream of exchange
rate updates, you will need to handle this time dependence (see “Time-dependence of
joins” on page 475 ).
Subscribing to a stream of changes, rather than querying the current state when
needed, brings us closer to a spreadsheet-like model of computation: when some
piece of data changes, any derived data that depends on it can swiftly be updated.
There are still many open questions, for example around issues like time-dependent
joins, but I believe that building applications around dataflow ideas is a very promis‐
ing direction to go in. 
Observing Derived State
At an abstract level, the dataflow systems discussed in the last section give you a pro‐
cess for creating derived datasets (such as search indexes, materialized views, and
predictive models) and keeping them up to date. Let’s call that process the write path:
whenever some piece of information is written to the system, it may go through mul‐
tiple stages of batch and stream processing, and eventually every derived dataset is
updated to incorporate the data that was written. Figure 12-1 shows an example of
updating a search index.
Figure 12-1. In a search index, writes (document updates) meet reads (queries).
But why do you create the derived dataset in the first place? Most likely because you
want to query it again at a later time. This is the read path : when serving a user
Unbundling Databases | 509

iii. Less facetiously, the set of distinct search queries with nonempty search results is finite, assuming a finite
corpus. However, it would be exponential in the number of terms in the corpus, which is still pretty bad news.
request you read from the derived dataset, perhaps perform some more processing
on the results, and construct the response to the user.
Taken together, the write path and the read path encompass the whole journey of the
data, from the point where it is collected to the point where it is consumed (probably
by another human). The write path is the portion of the journey that is precomputed
—i.e., that is done eagerly as soon as the data comes in, regardless of whether anyone
has asked to see it. The read path is the portion of the journey that only happens
when someone asks for it. If you are familiar with functional programming lan‐
guages, you might notice that the write path is similar to eager evaluation, and the
read path is similar to lazy evaluation.
The derived dataset is the place where the write path and the read path meet, as illus‐
trated in Figure 12-1. It represents a trade-off between the amount of work that needs
to be done at write time and the amount that needs to be done at read time.
Materialized views and caching
A full-text search index is a good example: the write path updates the index, and the
read path searches the index for keywords. Both reads and writes need to do some
work. Writes need to update the index entries for all terms that appear in the docu‐
ment. Reads need to search for each of the words in the query, and apply Boolean
logic to find documents that contain all of the words in the query (an AND operator),
or any synonym of each of the words (an OR operator).
If you didn’t have an index, a search query would have to scan over all documents
(like grep), which would get very expensive if you had a large number of documents.
No index means less work on the write path (no index to update), but a lot more
work on the read path.
On the other hand, you could imagine precomputing the search results for all possi‐
ble queries. In that case, you would have less work to do on the read path: no Boolean
logic, just find the results for your query and return them. However, the write path
would be a lot more expensive: the set of possible search queries that could be asked
is infinite, and thus precomputing all possible search results would require infinite
time and storage space. That wouldn’t work so well. iii
Another option would be to precompute the search results for only a fixed set of the
most common queries, so that they can be served quickly without having to go to the
index. The uncommon queries can still be served from the index. This would gener‐
ally be called a cache of common queries, although we could also call it a materialized
510 | Chapter 12: The Future of Data Systems

view, as it would need to be updated when new documents appear that should be
included in the results of one of the common queries.
From this example we can see that an index is not the only possible boundary
between the write path and the read path. Caching of common search results is possi‐
ble, and grep-like scanning without the index is also possible on a small number of
documents. Viewed like this, the role of caches, indexes, and materialized views is
simple: they shift the boundary between the read path and the write path. They allow
us to do more work on the write path, by precomputing results, in order to save effort
on the read path.
Shifting the boundary between work done on the write path and the read path was in
fact the topic of the Twitter example at the beginning of this book, in “Describing
Load” on page 11 . In that example, we also saw how the boundary between write path
and read path might be drawn differently for celebrities compared to ordinary users.
After 500 pages we have come full circle!
Stateful, offline-capable clients
I find the idea of a boundary between write and read paths interesting because we can
discuss shifting that boundary and explore what that shift means in practical terms.
Let’s look at the idea in a different context.
The huge popularity of web applications in the last two decades has led us to certain
assumptions about application development that are easy to take for granted. In par‐
ticular, the client/server model—in which clients are largely stateless and servers have
the authority over data—is so common that we almost forget that anything else
exists. However, technology keeps moving on, and I think it is important to question
the status quo from time to time.
Traditionally, web browsers have been stateless clients that can only do useful things
when you have an internet connection (just about the only thing you could do offline
was to scroll up and down in a page that you had previously loaded while online).
However, recent “single-page” JavaScript web apps have gained a lot of stateful capa‐
bilities, including client-side user interface interaction and persistent local storage in
the web browser. Mobile apps can similarly store a lot of state on the device and don’t
require a round-trip to the server for most user interactions.
These changing capabilities have led to a renewed interest in offline-first applications
that do as much as possible using a local database on the same device, without requir‐
ing an internet connection, and sync with remote servers in the background when a
network connection is available [ 42]. Since mobile devices often have slow and unre‐
liable cellular internet connections, it’s a big advantage for users if their user interface
does not have to wait for synchronous network requests, and if apps mostly work off‐
line (see “Clients with offline operation” on page 170 ).
Unbundling Databases | 511

When we move away from the assumption of stateless clients talking to a central
database and toward state that is maintained on end-user devices, a world of new
opportunities opens up. In particular, we can think of the on-device state as a cache of
state on the server . The pixels on the screen are a materialized view onto model
objects in the client app; the model objects are a local replica of state in a remote
datacenter [27].
Pushing state changes to clients
In a typical web page, if you load the page in a web browser and the data subse‐
quently changes on the server, the browser does not find out about the change until
you reload the page. The browser only reads the data at one point in time, assuming
that it is static—it does not subscribe to updates from the server. Thus, the state on
the device is a stale cache that is not updated unless you explicitly poll for changes.
(HTTP-based feed subscription protocols like RSS are really just a basic form of poll‐
ing.)
More recent protocols have moved beyond the basic request/response pattern of
HTTP: server-sent events (the EventSource API) and WebSockets provide communi‐
cation channels by which a web browser can keep an open TCP connection to a
server, and the server can actively push messages to the browser as long as it remains
connected. This provides an opportunity for the server to actively inform the end-
user client about any changes to the state it has stored locally, reducing the staleness
of the client-side state.
In terms of our model of write path and read path, actively pushing state changes all
the way to client devices means extending the write path all the way to the end user.
When a client is first initialized, it would still need to use a read path to get its initial
state, but thereafter it could rely on a stream of state changes sent by the server. The
ideas we discussed around stream processing and messaging are not restricted to run‐
ning only in a datacenter: we can take the ideas further, and extend them all the way
to end-user devices [43].
The devices will be offline some of the time, and unable to receive any notifications of
state changes from the server during that time. But we already solved that problem: in
“Consumer offsets” on page 449 we discussed how a consumer of a log-based mes‐
sage broker can reconnect after failing or becoming disconnected, and ensure that it
doesn’t miss any messages that arrived while it was disconnected. The same techni‐
que works for individual users, where each device is a small subscriber to a small
stream of events.
End-to-end event streams
Recent tools for developing stateful clients and user interfaces, such as the Elm lan‐
guage [30] and Facebook’s toolchain of React, Flux, and Redux [ 44], already manage
512 | Chapter 12: The Future of Data Systems

internal client-side state by subscribing to a stream of events representing user input
or responses from a server, structured similarly to event sourcing (see “Event Sourc‐
ing” on page 457 ).
It would be very natural to extend this programming model to also allow a server to
push state-change events into this client-side event pipeline. Thus, state changes
could flow through an end-to-end write path: from the interaction on one device that
triggers a state change, via event logs and through several derived data systems and
stream processors, all the way to the user interface of a person observing the state on
another device. These state changes could be propagated with fairly low delay—say,
under one second end to end.
Some applications, such as instant messaging and online games, already have such a
“real-time” architecture (in the sense of interactions with low delay, not in the sense
of “Response time guarantees” on page 298). But why don’t we build all applications
this way?
The challenge is that the assumption of stateless clients and request/response interac‐
tions is very deeply ingrained in our databases, libraries, frameworks, and protocols.
Many datastores support read and write operations where a request returns one
response, but much fewer provide an ability to subscribe to changes—i.e., a request
that returns a stream of responses over time (see “API support for change streams”
on page 456).
In order to extend the write path all the way to the end user, we would need to funda‐
mentally rethink the way we build many of these systems: moving away from request/
response interaction and toward publish/subscribe dataflow [ 27]. I think that the
advantages of more responsive user interfaces and better offline support would make
it worth the effort. If you are designing data systems, I hope that you will keep in
mind the option of subscribing to changes, not just querying the current state.
Reads are events too
We discussed that when a stream processor writes derived data to a store (database,
cache, or index), and when user requests query that store, the store acts as the bound‐
ary between the write path and the read path. The store allows random-access read
queries to the data that would otherwise require scanning the whole event log.
In many cases, the data storage is separate from the streaming system. But recall that
stream processors also need to maintain state to perform aggregations and joins (see
“Stream Joins” on page 472). This state is normally hidden inside the stream pro‐
cessor, but some frameworks allow it to also be queried by outside clients [ 45], turn‐
ing the stream processor itself into a kind of simple database.
I would like to take that idea further. As discussed so far, the writes to the store go
through an event log, while reads are transient network requests that go directly to
Unbundling Databases | 513

the nodes that store the data being queried. This is a reasonable design, but not the
only possible one. It is also possible to represent read requests as streams of events,
and send both the read events and the write events through a stream processor; the
processor responds to read events by emitting the result of the read to an output
stream [46].
When both the writes and the reads are represented as events, and routed to the same
stream operator in order to be handled, we are in fact performing a stream-table join
between the stream of read queries and the database. The read event needs to be sent
to the database partition holding the data (see “Request Routing” on page 214), just
like batch and stream processors need to copartition inputs on the same key when
joining (see “Reduce-Side Joins and Grouping” on page 403 ).
This correspondence between serving requests and performing joins is quite funda‐
mental [47]. A one-off read request just passes the request through the join operator
and then immediately forgets it; a subscribe request is a persistent join with past and
future events on the other side of the join.
Recording a log of read events potentially also has benefits with regard to tracking
causal dependencies and data provenance across a system: it would allow you to
reconstruct what the user saw before they made a particular decision. For example, in
an online shop, it is likely that the predicted shipping date and the inventory status
shown to a customer affect whether they choose to buy an item [ 4]. To analyze this
connection, you need to record the result of the user’s query of the shipping and
inventory status.
Writing read events to durable storage thus enables better tracking of causal depen‐
dencies (see “Ordering events to capture causality” on page 493), but it incurs addi‐
tional storage and I/O cost. Optimizing such systems to reduce the overhead is still
an open research problem [ 2]. But if you already log read requests for operational
purposes, as a side effect of request processing, it is not such a great change to make
the log the source of the requests instead.
Multi-partition data processing
For queries that only touch a single partition, the effort of sending queries through a
stream and collecting a stream of responses is perhaps overkill. However, this idea
opens the possibility of distributed execution of complex queries that need to com‐
bine data from several partitions, taking advantage of the infrastructure for message
routing, partitioning, and joining that is already provided by stream processors.
Storm’s distributed RPC feature supports this usage pattern (see “Message passing
and RPC” on page 468). For example, it has been used to compute the number of
people who have seen a URL on Twitter—i.e., the union of the follower sets of every‐
one who has tweeted that URL [ 48]. As the set of Twitter users is partitioned, this
computation requires combining results from many partitions.
514 | Chapter 12: The Future of Data Systems

Another example of this pattern occurs in fraud prevention: in order to assess the risk
of whether a particular purchase event is fraudulent, you can examine the reputation
scores of the user’s IP address, email address, billing address, shipping address, and
so on. Each of these reputation databases is itself partitioned, and so collecting the
scores for a particular purchase event requires a sequence of joins with differently
partitioned datasets [49].
The internal query execution graphs of MPP databases have similar characteristics
(see “Comparing Hadoop to Distributed Databases”  on page 414). If you need to per‐
form this kind of multi-partition join, it is probably simpler to use a database that
provides this feature than to implement it using a stream processor. However, treat‐
ing queries as streams provides an option for implementing large-scale applications
that run against the limits of conventional off-the-shelf solutions. 
Aiming for Correctness
With stateless services that only read data, it is not a big deal if something goes
wrong: you can fix the bug and restart the service, and everything returns to normal.
Stateful systems such as databases are not so simple: they are designed to remember
things forever (more or less), so if something goes wrong, the effects also potentially
last forever—which means they require more careful thought [ 50].
We want to build applications that are reliable and correct (i.e., programs whose
semantics are well defined and understood, even in the face of various faults). For
approximately four decades, the transaction properties of atomicity, isolation, and
durability (Chapter 7) have been the tools of choice for building correct applications.
However, those foundations are weaker than they seem: witness for example the con‐
fusion of weak isolation levels (see “Weak Isolation Levels” on page 233 ).
In some areas, transactions are being abandoned entirely and replaced with models
that offer better performance and scalability, but much messier semantics (see for
example “Leaderless Replication” on page 177). Consistency is often talked about, but
poorly defined (see “Consistency”  on page 224 and Chapter 9). Some people assert
that we should “embrace weak consistency” for the sake of better availability, while
lacking a clear idea of what that actually means in practice.
For a topic that is so important, our understanding and our engineering methods are
surprisingly flaky. For example, it is very difficult to determine whether it is safe to
run a particular application at a particular transaction isolation level or replication
configuration [51, 52]. Often simple solutions appear to work correctly when concur‐
rency is low and there are no faults, but turn out to have many subtle bugs in more
demanding circumstances.
For example, Kyle Kingsbury’s Jepsen experiments [ 53] have highlighted the stark
discrepancies between some products’ claimed safety guarantees and their actual
Aiming for Correctness | 515

behavior in the presence of network problems and crashes. Even if infrastructure
products like databases were free from problems, application code would still need to
correctly use the features they provide, which is error-prone if the configuration is
hard to understand (which is the case with weak isolation levels, quorum configura‐
tions, and so on).
If your application can tolerate occasionally corrupting or losing data in unpredicta‐
ble ways, life is a lot simpler, and you might be able to get away with simply crossing
your fingers and hoping for the best. On the other hand, if you need stronger assur‐
ances of correctness, then serializability and atomic commit are established
approaches, but they come at a cost: they typically only work in a single datacenter
(ruling out geographically distributed architectures), and they limit the scale and
fault-tolerance properties you can achieve.
While the traditional transaction approach is not going away, I also believe it is not
the last word in making applications correct and resilient to faults. In this section I
will suggest some ways of thinking about correctness in the context of dataflow archi‐
tectures.
The End-to-End Argument for Databases
Just because an application uses a data system that provides comparatively strong
safety properties, such as serializable transactions, that does not mean the application
is guaranteed to be free from data loss or corruption. For example, if an application
has a bug that causes it to write incorrect data, or delete data from a database, serial‐
izable transactions aren’t going to save you.
This example may seem frivolous, but it is worth taking seriously: application bugs
occur, and people make mistakes. I used this example in “State, Streams, and Immut‐
ability”  on page 459 to argue in favor of immutable and append-only data, because it
is easier to recover from such mistakes if you remove the ability of faulty code to
destroy good data.
Although immutability is useful, it is not a cure-all by itself. Let’s look at a more sub‐
tle example of data corruption that can occur.
Exactly-once execution of an operation
In “Fault Tolerance” on page 476 we encountered an idea called exactly-once (or
effectively-once) semantics. If something goes wrong while processing a message, you
can either give up (drop the message—i.e., incur data loss) or try again. If you try
again, there is the risk that it actually succeeded the first time, but you just didn’t find
out about the success, and so the message ends up being processed twice.
Processing twice is a form of data corruption: it is undesirable to charge a customer
twice for the same service (billing them too much) or increment a counter twice
516 | Chapter 12: The Future of Data Systems

(overstating some metric). In this context, exactly-once means arranging the compu‐
tation such that the final effect is the same as if no faults had occurred, even if the
operation actually was retried due to some fault. We previously discussed a few
approaches for achieving this goal.
One of the most effective approaches is to make the operation idempotent (see
“Idempotence”  on page 478); that is, to ensure that it has the same effect, no matter
whether it is executed once or multiple times. However, taking an operation that is
not naturally idempotent and making it idempotent requires some effort and care:
you may need to maintain some additional metadata (such as the set of operation IDs
that have updated a value), and ensure fencing when failing over from one node to
another (see “The leader and the lock” on page 301 ).
Duplicate suppression
The same pattern of needing to suppress duplicates occurs in many other places
besides stream processing. For example, TCP uses sequence numbers on packets to
put them in the correct order at the recipient, and to determine whether any packets
were lost or duplicated on the network. Any lost packets are retransmitted and any
duplicates are removed by the TCP stack before it hands the data to an application.
However, this duplicate suppression only works within the context of a single TCP
connection. Imagine the TCP connection is a client’s connection to a database, and it
is currently executing the transaction in Example 12-1. In many databases, a transac‐
tion is tied to a client connection (if the client sends several queries, the database
knows that they belong to the same transaction because they are sent on the same
TCP connection). If the client suffers a network interruption and connection timeout
after sending the COMMIT, but before hearing back from the database server, it does
not know whether the transaction has been committed or aborted (Figure 8-1).
Example 12-1. A nonidempotent transfer of money from one account to another
BEGIN TRANSACTION;
UPDATE accounts SET balance = balance + 11.00 WHERE account_id = 1234;
UPDATE accounts SET balance = balance - 11.00 WHERE account_id = 4321;
COMMIT;
The client can reconnect to the database and retry the transaction, but now it is out‐
side of the scope of TCP duplicate suppression. Since the transaction in Example 12-1
is not idempotent, it could happen that $22 is transferred instead of the desired $11.
Thus, even though Example 12-1 is a standard example for transaction atomicity, it is
actually not correct, and real banks do not work like this [3].
Two-phase commit (see “Atomic Commit and Two-Phase Commit (2PC)”  on page
354) protocols break the 1:1 mapping between a TCP connection and a transaction,
since they must allow a transaction coordinator to reconnect to a database after a net‐
Aiming for Correctness | 517

work fault, and tell it whether to commit or abort an in-doubt transaction. Is this suf‐
ficient to ensure that the transaction will only be executed once? Unfortunately not.
Even if we can suppress duplicate transactions between the database client and
server, we still need to worry about the network between the end-user device and the
application server. For example, if the end-user client is a web browser, it probably
uses an HTTP POST request to submit an instruction to the server. Perhaps the user
is on a weak cellular data connection, and they succeed in sending the POST, but the
signal becomes too weak before they are able to receive the response from the server.
In this case, the user will probably be shown an error message, and they may retry
manually. Web browsers warn, “Are you sure you want to submit this form again?”—
and the user says yes, because they wanted the operation to happen. (The Post/Redi‐
rect/Get pattern [54] avoids this warning message in normal operation, but it doesn’t
help if the POST request times out.) From the web server’s point of view the retry is a
separate request, and from the database’s point of view it is a separate transaction.
The usual deduplication mechanisms don’t help.
Operation identifiers
To make the operation idempotent through several hops of network communication,
it is not sufficient to rely just on a transaction mechanism provided by a database—
you need to consider the end-to-end flow of the request.
For example, you could generate a unique identifier for an operation (such as a
UUID) and include it as a hidden form field in the client application, or calculate a
hash of all the relevant form fields to derive the operation ID [ 3]. If the web browser
submits the POST request twice, the two requests will have the same operation ID.
You can then pass that operation ID all the way through to the database and check
that you only ever execute one operation with a given ID, as shown in Example 12-2.
Example 12-2. Suppressing duplicate requests using a unique ID
ALTER TABLE requests ADD UNIQUE (request_id);
BEGIN TRANSACTION;
INSERT INTO requests
  (request_id, from_account, to_account, amount)
  VALUES('0286FDB8-D7E1-423F-B40B-792B3608036C' , 4321, 1234, 11.00);
UPDATE accounts SET balance = balance + 11.00 WHERE account_id = 1234;
UPDATE accounts SET balance = balance - 11.00 WHERE account_id = 4321;
COMMIT;
518 | Chapter 12: The Future of Data Systems

Example 12-2  relies on a uniqueness constraint on the request_id column. If a
transaction attempts to insert an ID that already exists, the INSERT fails and the trans‐
action is aborted, preventing it from taking effect twice. Relational databases can gen‐
erally maintain a uniqueness constraint correctly, even at weak isolation levels
(whereas an application-level check-then-insert may fail under nonserializable isola‐
tion, as discussed in “Write Skew and Phantoms” on page 246 ).
Besides suppressing duplicate requests, the requests table in Example 12-2 acts as a
kind of event log, hinting in the direction of event sourcing (see “Event Sourcing” on
page 457). The updates to the account balances don’t actually have to happen in the
same transaction as the insertion of the event, since they are redundant and could be
derived from the request event in a downstream consumer—as long as the event is
processed exactly once, which can again be enforced using the request ID.
The end-to-end argument
This scenario of suppressing duplicate transactions is just one example of a more
general principle called the end-to-end argument , which was articulated by Saltzer,
Reed, and Clark in 1984 [55]:
The function in question can completely and correctly be implemented only with the
knowledge and help of the application standing at the endpoints of the communica‐
tion system. Therefore, providing that questioned function as a feature of the commu‐
nication system itself is not possible. (Sometimes an incomplete version of the function
provided by the communication system may be useful as a performance enhance‐
ment.)
In our example, the function in question was duplicate suppression. We saw that TCP
suppresses duplicate packets at the TCP connection level, and some stream process‐
ors provide so-called exactly-once semantics at the message processing level, but that
is not enough to prevent a user from submitting a duplicate request if the first one
times out. By themselves, TCP, database transactions, and stream processors cannot
entirely rule out these duplicates. Solving the problem requires an end-to-end solu‐
tion: a transaction identifier that is passed all the way from the end-user client to the
database.
The end-to-end argument also applies to checking the integrity of data: checksums
built into Ethernet, TCP, and TLS can detect corruption of packets in the network,
but they cannot detect corruption due to bugs in the software at the sending and
receiving ends of the network connection, or corruption on the disks where the data
is stored. If you want to catch all possible sources of data corruption, you also need
end-to-end checksums.
A similar argument applies with encryption [ 55]: the password on your home WiFi
network protects against people snooping your WiFi traffic, but not against attackers
elsewhere on the internet; TLS/SSL between your client and the server protects
Aiming for Correctness | 519

against network attackers, but not against compromises of the server. Only end-to-
end encryption and authentication can protect against all of these things.
Although the low-level features (TCP duplicate suppression, Ethernet checksums,
WiFi encryption) cannot provide the desired end-to-end features by themselves, they
are still useful, since they reduce the probability of problems at the higher levels. For
example, HTTP requests would often get mangled if we didn’t have TCP putting the
packets back in the right order. We just need to remember that the low-level reliabil‐
ity features are not by themselves sufficient to ensure end-to-end correctness.
Applying end-to-end thinking in data systems
This brings me back to my original thesis: just because an application uses a data sys‐
tem that provides comparatively strong safety properties, such as serializable transac‐
tions, that does not mean the application is guaranteed to be free from data loss or
corruption. The application itself needs to take end-to-end measures, such as dupli‐
cate suppression, as well.
That is a shame, because fault-tolerance mechanisms are hard to get right. Low-level
reliability mechanisms, such as those in TCP, work quite well, and so the remaining
higher-level faults occur fairly rarely. It would be really nice to wrap up the remain‐
ing high-level fault-tolerance machinery in an abstraction so that application code
needn’t worry about it—but I fear that we have not yet found the right abstraction.
Transactions have long been seen as a good abstraction, and I do believe that they are
useful. As discussed in the introduction to Chapter 7, they take a wide range of possi‐
ble issues (concurrent writes, constraint violations, crashes, network interruptions,
disk failures) and collapse them down to two possible outcomes: commit or abort.
That is a huge simplification of the programming model, but I fear that it is not
enough.
Transactions are expensive, especially when they involve heterogeneous storage tech‐
nologies (see “Distributed Transactions in Practice”  on page 360). When we refuse to
use distributed transactions because they are too expensive, we end up having to
reimplement fault-tolerance mechanisms in application code. As numerous examples
throughout this book have shown, reasoning about concurrency and partial failure is
difficult and counterintuitive, and so I suspect that most application-level mecha‐
nisms do not work correctly. The consequence is lost or corrupted data.
For these reasons, I think it is worth exploring fault-tolerance abstractions that make
it easy to provide application-specific end-to-end correctness properties, but also
maintain good performance and good operational characteristics in a large-scale dis‐
tributed environment. 
520 | Chapter 12: The Future of Data Systems

Enforcing Constraints
Let’s think about correctness in the context of the ideas around unbundling databases
(“Unbundling Databases” on page 499). We saw that end-to-end duplicate suppres‐
sion can be achieved with a request ID that is passed all the way from the client to the
database that records the write. What about other kinds of constraints?
In particular, let’s focus on uniqueness constraints—such as the one we relied on in
Example 12-2. In “Constraints and uniqueness guarantees” on page 330 we saw sev‐
eral other examples of application features that need to enforce uniqueness: a user‐
name or email address must uniquely identify a user, a file storage service cannot
have more than one file with the same name, and two people cannot book the same
seat on a flight or in a theater.
Other kinds of constraints are very similar: for example, ensuring that an account
balance never goes negative, that you don’t sell more items than you have in stock in
the warehouse, or that a meeting room does not have overlapping bookings. Techni‐
ques that enforce uniqueness can often be used for these kinds of constraints as well.
Uniqueness constraints require consensus
In Chapter 9 we saw that in a distributed setting, enforcing a uniqueness constraint
requires consensus: if there are several concurrent requests with the same value, the
system somehow needs to decide which one of the conflicting operations is accepted,
and reject the others as violations of the constraint.
The most common way of achieving this consensus is to make a single node the
leader, and put it in charge of making all the decisions. That works fine as long as you
don’t mind funneling all requests through a single node (even if the client is on the
other side of the world), and as long as that node doesn’t fail. If you need to tolerate
the leader failing, you’re back at the consensus problem again (see “Single-leader rep‐
lication and consensus” on page 367 ).
Uniqueness checking can be scaled out by partitioning based on the value that needs
to be unique. For example, if you need to ensure uniqueness by request ID, as in
Example 12-2, you can ensure all requests with the same request ID are routed to the
same partition (see Chapter 6). If you need usernames to be unique, you can partition
by hash of username.
However, asynchronous multi-master replication is ruled out, because it could hap‐
pen that different masters concurrently accept conflicting writes, and thus the values
are no longer unique (see “Implementing Linearizable Systems”  on page 332). If you
want to be able to immediately reject any writes that would violate the constraint,
synchronous coordination is unavoidable [56].
Aiming for Correctness | 521

Uniqueness in log-based messaging
The log ensures that all consumers see messages in the same order—a guarantee that
is formally known as total order broadcast and is equivalent to consensus (see “Total
Order Broadcast” on page 348). In the unbundled database approach with log-based
messaging, we can use a very similar approach to enforce uniqueness constraints.
A stream processor consumes all the messages in a log partition sequentially on a sin‐
gle thread (see “Logs compared to traditional messaging” on page 448). Thus, if the
log is partitioned based on the value that needs to be unique, a stream processor can
unambiguously and deterministically decide which one of several conflicting opera‐
tions came first. For example, in the case of several users trying to claim the same
username [57]:
1. Every request for a username is encoded as a message, and appended to a parti‐
tion determined by the hash of the username.
2. A stream processor sequentially reads the requests in the log, using a local data‐
base to keep track of which usernames are taken. For every request for a user‐
name that is available, it records the name as taken and emits a success message
to an output stream. For every request for a username that is already taken, it
emits a rejection message to an output stream.
3. The client that requested the username watches the output stream and waits for a
success or rejection message corresponding to its request.
This algorithm is basically the same as in “Implementing linearizable storage using
total order broadcast” on page 350. It scales easily to a large request throughput by
increasing the number of partitions, as each partition can be processed independ‐
ently.
The approach works not only for uniqueness constraints, but also for many other
kinds of constraints. Its fundamental principle is that any writes that may conflict are
routed to the same partition and processed sequentially. As discussed in “What is a
conflict?” on page 174  and “Write Skew and Phantoms” on page 246 , the definition of
a conflict may depend on the application, but the stream processor can use arbitrary
logic to validate a request. This idea is similar to the approach pioneered by Bayou in
the 1990s [58].
Multi-partition request processing
Ensuring that an operation is executed atomically, while satisfying constraints,
becomes more interesting when several partitions are involved. In Example 12-2 ,
there are potentially three partitions: the one containing the request ID, the one con‐
taining the payee account, and the one containing the payer account. There is no rea‐
522 | Chapter 12: The Future of Data Systems

son why those three things should be in the same partition, since they are all
independent from each other.
In the traditional approach to databases, executing this transaction would require an
atomic commit across all three partitions, which essentially forces it into a total order
with respect to all other transactions on any of those partitions. Since there is now
cross-partition coordination, different partitions can no longer be processed inde‐
pendently, so throughput is likely to suffer.
However, it turns out that equivalent correctness can be achieved with partitioned
logs, and without an atomic commit:
1. The request to transfer money from account A to account B is given a unique
request ID by the client, and appended to a log partition based on the request ID.
2. A stream processor reads the log of requests. For each request message it emits
two messages to output streams: a debit instruction to the payer account A (par‐
titioned by A), and a credit instruction to the payee account B (partitioned by B).
The original request ID is included in those emitted messages.
3. Further processors consume the streams of credit and debit instructions, dedu‐
plicate by request ID, and apply the changes to the account balances.
Steps 1 and 2 are necessary because if the client directly sent the credit and debit
instructions, it would require an atomic commit across those two partitions to ensure
that either both or neither happen. To avoid the need for a distributed transaction,
we first durably log the request as a single message, and then derive the credit and
debit instructions from that first message. Single-object writes are atomic in almost
all data systems (see “Single-object writes” on page 230), and so the request either
appears in the log or it doesn’t, without any need for a multi-partition atomic com‐
mit.
If the stream processor in step 2 crashes, it resumes processing from its last check‐
point. In doing so, it does not skip any request messages, but it may process requests
multiple times and produce duplicate credit and debit instructions. However, since it
is deterministic, it will just produce the same instructions again, and the processors in
step 3 can easily deduplicate them using the end-to-end request ID.
If you want to ensure that the payer account is not overdrawn by this transfer, you
can additionally have a stream processor (partitioned by payer account number) that
maintains account balances and validates transactions. Only valid transactions would
then be placed in the request log in step 1.
By breaking down the multi-partition transaction into two differently partitioned
stages and using the end-to-end request ID, we have achieved the same correctness
property (every request is applied exactly once to both the payer and payee accounts),
even in the presence of faults, and without using an atomic commit protocol. The
Aiming for Correctness | 523