viii. Datomic and Cascalog use a Clojure S-expression syntax for Datalog. In the following examples we use a
Prolog syntax, which is a little easier to read, but this makes no functional difference.
Graph Databases Compared to the Network Model
In “Are Document Databases Repeating History?” on page 36 we discussed how
CODASYL and the relational model competed to solve the problem of many-to-
many relationships in IMS. At first glance, CODASYL’s network model looks similar
to the graph model. Are graph databases the second coming of CODASYL in
disguise?
No. They differ in several important ways:
• In CODASYL, a database had a schema that specified which record type could be
nested within which other record type. In a graph database, there is no such
restriction: any vertex can have an edge to any other vertex. This gives much
greater flexibility for applications to adapt to changing requirements.
• In CODASYL, the only way to reach a particular record was to traverse one of
the access paths to it. In a graph database, you can refer directly to any vertex by
its unique ID, or you can use an index to find vertices with a particular value.
• In CODASYL, the children of a record were an ordered set, so the database had
to maintain that ordering (which had consequences for the storage layout) and
applications that inserted new records into the database had to worry about the
positions of the new records in these sets. In a graph database, vertices and edges
are not ordered (you can only sort the results when making a query).
• In CODASYL, all queries were imperative, difficult to write and easily broken by
changes in the schema. In a graph database, you can write your traversal in
imperative code if you want to, but most graph databases also support high-level,
declarative query languages such as Cypher or SPARQL.
The Foundation: Datalog
Datalog is a much older language than SPARQL or Cypher, having been studied
extensively by academics in the 1980s [ 44, 45, 46]. It is less well known among soft‐
ware engineers, but it is nevertheless important, because it provides the foundation
that later query languages build upon.
In practice, Datalog is used in a few data systems: for example, it is the query lan‐
guage of Datomic [ 40], and Cascalog [ 47] is a Datalog implementation for querying
large datasets in Hadoop.viii
60 | Chapter 2: Data Models and Query Languages

Datalog’s data model is similar to the triple-store model, generalized a bit. Instead of
writing a triple as ( subject, predicate, object), we write it as predicate(subject, object).
Example 2-10 shows how to write the data from our example in Datalog.
Example 2-10. A subset of the data in Figure 2-5, represented as Datalog facts
name(namerica, 'North America' ).
type(namerica, continent).
name(usa, 'United States' ).
type(usa, country).
within(usa, namerica).
name(idaho, 'Idaho' ).
type(idaho, state).
within(idaho, usa).
name(lucy, 'Lucy' ).
born_in(lucy, idaho).
Now that we have defined the data, we can write the same query as before, as shown
in Example 2-11. It looks a bit different from the equivalent in Cypher or SPARQL,
but don’t let that put you off. Datalog is a subset of Prolog, which you might have
seen before if you’ve studied computer science.
Example 2-11. The same query as Example 2-4, expressed in Datalog
within_recursive(Location, Name) :- name(Location, Name).     /* Rule 1 */
within_recursive(Location, Name) :- within(Location, Via),    /* Rule 2 */
                                    within_recursive(Via, Name).
migrated(Name, BornIn, LivingIn) :- name(Person, Name),       /* Rule 3 */
                                    born_in(Person, BornLoc),
                                    within_recursive(BornLoc, BornIn),
                                    lives_in(Person, LivingLoc),
                                    within_recursive(LivingLoc, LivingIn).
?- migrated(Who, 'United States' , 'Europe' ).
/* Who = 'Lucy'. */
Cypher and SPARQL jump in right away with SELECT, but Datalog takes a small step
at a time. We define rules that tell the database about new predicates: here, we define
two new predicates, within_recursive and migrated. These predicates aren’t triples
stored in the database, but instead they are derived from data or from other rules.
Rules can refer to other rules, just like functions can call other functions or recur‐
sively call themselves. Like this, complex queries can be built up a small piece at a
time.
Graph-Like Data Models | 61

In rules, words that start with an uppercase letter are variables, and predicates are
matched like in Cypher and SPARQL. For example, name(Location, Name) matches
the triple name(namerica, 'North America')  with variable bindings Location =
namerica and Name = 'North America' .
A rule applies if the system can find a match for all predicates on the righthand side
of the :- operator. When the rule applies, it’s as though the lefthand side of the :-
was added to the database (with variables replaced by the values they matched).
One possible way of applying the rules is thus:
1. name(namerica, 'North America')  exists in the database, so rule 1 applies. It
generates within_recursive(namerica, 'North America') .
2. within(usa, namerica) exists in the database and the previous step generated
within_recursive(namerica, 'North America') , so rule 2 applies. It generates
within_recursive(usa, 'North America') .
3. within(idaho, usa)  exists in the database and the previous step generated
within_recursive(usa, 'North America') , so rule 2 applies. It generates
within_recursive(idaho, 'North America') .
By repeated application of rules 1 and 2, the within_recursive predicate can tell us
all the locations in North America (or any other location name) contained in our
database. This process is illustrated in Figure 2-6.
Figure 2-6. Determining that Idaho is in North America, using the Datalog rules from
Example 2-11.
Now rule 3 can find people who were born in some location BornIn and live in some
location LivingIn. By querying with BornIn = 'United States'  and LivingIn =
'Europe' , and leaving the person as a variable Who, we ask the Datalog system to find
out which values can appear for the variable Who. So, finally we get the same answer as
in the earlier Cypher and SPARQL queries.
62 | Chapter 2: Data Models and Query Languages

The Datalog approach requires a different kind of thinking to the other query lan‐
guages discussed in this chapter, but it’s a very powerful approach, because rules can
be combined and reused in different queries. It’s less convenient for simple one-off
queries, but it can cope better if your data is complex. 
Summary
Data models are a huge subject, and in this chapter we have taken a quick look at a
broad variety of different models. We didn’t have space to go into all the details of
each model, but hopefully the overview has been enough to whet your appetite to
find out more about the model that best fits your application’s requirements.
Historically, data started out being represented as one big tree (the hierarchical
model), but that wasn’t good for representing many-to-many relationships, so the
relational model was invented to solve that problem. More recently, developers found
that some applications don’t fit well in the relational model either. New nonrelational
“NoSQL” datastores have diverged in two main directions:
1. Document databases target use cases where data comes in self-contained docu‐
ments and relationships between one document and another are rare.
2. Graph databases go in the opposite direction, targeting use cases where anything
is potentially related to everything.
All three models (document, relational, and graph) are widely used today, and each is
good in its respective domain. One model can be emulated in terms of another model
—for example, graph data can be represented in a relational database—but the result
is often awkward. That’s why we have different systems for different purposes, not a
single one-size-fits-all solution.
One thing that document and graph databases have in common is that they typically
don’t enforce a schema for the data they store, which can make it easier to adapt
applications to changing requirements. However, your application most likely still
assumes that data has a certain structure; it’s just a question of whether the schema is
explicit (enforced on write) or implicit (handled on read).
Each data model comes with its own query language or framework, and we discussed
several examples: SQL, MapReduce, MongoDB’s aggregation pipeline, Cypher,
SPARQL, and Datalog. We also touched on CSS and XSL/XPath, which aren’t data‐
base query languages but have interesting parallels.
Although we have covered a lot of ground, there are still many data models left
unmentioned. To give just a few brief examples:
• Researchers working with genome data often need to perform sequence-
similarity searches , which means taking one very long string (representing a
Summary | 63

DNA molecule) and matching it against a large database of strings that are simi‐
lar, but not identical. None of the databases described here can handle this kind
of usage, which is why researchers have written specialized genome database
software like GenBank [48].
• Particle physicists have been doing Big Data–style large-scale data analysis for
decades, and projects like the Large Hadron Collider (LHC) now work with hun‐
dreds of petabytes! At such a scale custom solutions are required to stop the
hardware cost from spiraling out of control [49].
• Full-text search is arguably a kind of data model that is frequently used alongside
databases. Information retrieval is a large specialist subject that we won’t cover in
great detail in this book, but we’ll touch on search indexes in Chapter 3  and
Part III.
We have to leave it there for now. In the next chapter we will discuss some of the
trade-offs that come into play when implementing the data models described in this
chapter. 
References
[1] Edgar F. Codd: “ A Relational Model of Data for Large Shared Data Banks ,” Com‐
munications of the ACM , volume 13, number 6, pages 377–387, June 1970. doi:
10.1145/362384.362685
[2] Michael Stonebraker and Joseph M. Hellerstein: “ What Goes Around Comes
Around,” in Readings in Database Systems, 4th edition, MIT Press, pages 2–41, 2005.
ISBN: 978-0-262-69314-1
[3] Pramod J. Sadalage and Martin Fowler: NoSQL Distilled. Addison-Wesley, August
2012. ISBN: 978-0-321-82662-6
[4] Eric Evans: “ NoSQL: What’s in a Name? ,” blog.sym-link.com, October 30, 2009.
[5] James Phillips: “ Surprises in Our NoSQL Adoption Survey ,” blog.couchbase.com,
February 8, 2012.
[6] Michael Wagner: SQL/XML:2006 – Evaluierung der Standardkonformität ausge‐
wählter Datenbanksysteme . Diplomica Verlag, Hamburg, 2010. ISBN:
978-3-836-64609-3
[7] “ XML Data in SQL Server ,” SQL Server 2012 documentation, technet.micro‐
soft.com, 2013.
[8] “ PostgreSQL 9.3.1 Documentation ,” The PostgreSQL Global Development
Group, 2013.
[9] “ The MongoDB 2.4 Manual,” MongoDB, Inc., 2013.
64 | Chapter 2: Data Models and Query Languages

[10] “ RethinkDB 1.11 Documentation,” rethinkdb.com, 2013.
[11] “ Apache CouchDB 1.6 Documentation,” docs.couchdb.org, 2014.
[12] Lin Qiao, Kapil Surlaker, Shirshanka Das, et al.: “ On Brewing Fresh Espresso:
LinkedIn’s Distributed Data Serving Platform ,” at ACM International Conference on
Management of Data (SIGMOD), June 2013.
[13] Rick Long, Mark Harrington, Robert Hain, and Geoff Nicholls: IMS Primer .
IBM Redbook SG24-5352-00, IBM International Technical Support Organization,
January 2000.
[14] Stephen D. Bartlett: “ IBM’s IMS—Myths, Realities, and Opportunities ,” The
Clipper Group Navigator, TCG2013015LI, July 2013.
[15] Sarah Mei: “ Why You Should Never Use MongoDB ,” sarahmei.com, November
11, 2013.
[16] J. S. Knowles and D. M. R. Bell: “The CODASYL Model,” in Databases—Role
and Structure: An Advanced Course, edited by P. M. Stocker, P. M. D. Gray, and M. P.
Atkinson, pages 19–56, Cambridge University Press, 1984. ISBN: 978-0-521-25430-4
[17] Charles W. Bachman: “ The Programmer as Navigator ,” Communications of the
ACM, volume 16, number 11, pages 653–658, November 1973. doi:
10.1145/355611.362534
[18] Joseph M. Hellerstein, Michael Stonebraker, and James Hamilton: “ Architecture
of a Database System ,” Foundations and Trends in Databases , volume 1, number 2,
pages 141–259, November 2007. doi:10.1561/1900000002
[19] Sandeep Parikh and Kelly Stirman: “ Schema Design for Time Series Data in
MongoDB,” blog.mongodb.org, October 30, 2013.
[20] Martin Fowler: “ Schemaless Data Structures ,” martinfowler.com, January 7,
2013.
[21] Amr Awadallah: “ Schema-on-Read vs. Schema-on-Write ,” at Berkeley EECS
RAD Lab Retreat, Santa Cruz, CA, May 2009.
[22] Martin Odersky: “ The Trouble with Types,” at Strange Loop, September 2013.
[23] Conrad Irwin: “ MongoDB—Confessions of a PostgreSQL Lover ,” at
HTML5DevConf, October 2013.
[24] “ Percona Toolkit Documentation: pt-online-schema-change ,” Percona Ireland
Ltd., 2013.
[25] Rany Keddo, Tobias Bielohlawek, and Tobias Schmidt: “ Large Hadron Migra‐
tor,” SoundCloud, 2013.
Summary | 65

[26] Shlomi Noach: “ gh-ost: GitHub’s Online Schema Migration Tool for MySQL ,”
githubengineering.com, August 1, 2016.
[27] James C. Corbett, Jeffrey Dean, Michael Epstein, et al.: “ Spanner: Google’s
Globally-Distributed Database ,” at 10th USENIX Symposium on Operating System
Design and Implementation (OSDI), October 2012.
[28] Donald K. Burleson: “ Reduce I/O with Oracle Cluster Tables,” dba-oracle.com.
[29] Fay Chang, Jeffrey Dean, Sanjay Ghemawat, et al.: “ Bigtable: A Distributed Stor‐
age System for Structured Data ,” at 7th USENIX Symposium on Operating System
Design and Implementation (OSDI), November 2006.
[30] Bobbie J. Cochrane and Kathy A. McKnight: “ DB2 JSON Capabilities, Part 1:
Introduction to DB2 JSON,” IBM developerWorks, June 20, 2013.
[31] Herb Sutter: “ The Free Lunch Is Over: A Fundamental Turn Toward Concur‐
rency in Software ,” Dr. Dobb’s Journal , volume 30, number 3, pages 202-210, March
2005.
[32] Joseph M. Hellerstein: “ The Declarative Imperative: Experiences and Conjec‐
tures in Distributed Logic ,” Electrical Engineering and Computer Sciences, Univer‐
sity of California at Berkeley, Tech report UCB/EECS-2010-90, June 2010.
[33] Jeffrey Dean and Sanjay Ghemawat: “ MapReduce: Simplified Data Processing on
Large Clusters,” at 6th USENIX Symposium on Operating System Design and Imple‐
mentation (OSDI), December 2004.
[34] Craig Kerstiens: “ JavaScript in Your Postgres,” blog.heroku.com, June 5, 2013.
[35] Nathan Bronson, Zach Amsden, George Cabrera, et al.: “ TAO: Facebook’s Dis‐
tributed Data Store for the Social Graph ,” at USENIX Annual Technical Conference
(USENIX ATC), June 2013.
[36] “ Apache TinkerPop3.2.3 Documentation,” tinkerpop.apache.org, October 2016.
[37] “ The Neo4j Manual v2.0.0,” Neo Technology, 2013.
[38] Emil Eifrem: Twitter correspondence, January 3, 2014.
[39] David Beckett and Tim Berners-Lee: “ Turtle – Terse RDF Triple Language ,”
W3C Team Submission, March 28, 2011.
[40] “ Datomic Development Resources,” Metadata Partners, LLC, 2013.
[41] W3C RDF Working Group: “ Resource Description Framework (RDF) ,” w3.org,
10 February 2004.
[42] “ Apache Jena,” Apache Software Foundation.
66 | Chapter 2: Data Models and Query Languages

[43] Steve Harris, Andy Seaborne, and Eric Prud’hommeaux: “ SPARQL 1.1 Query
Language,” W3C Recommendation, March 2013.
[44] Todd J. Green, Shan Shan Huang, Boon Thau Loo, and Wenchao Zhou: “ Data‐
log and Recursive Query Processing ,” Foundations and Trends in Databases , volume
5, number 2, pages 105–195, November 2013. doi:10.1561/1900000017
[45] Stefano Ceri, Georg Gottlob, and Letizia Tanca: “ What You Always Wanted to
Know About Datalog (And Never Dared to Ask) ,” IEEE Transactions on Knowledge
and Data Engineering , volume 1, number 1, pages 146–166, March 1989. doi:
10.1109/69.43410
[46] Serge Abiteboul, Richard Hull, and Victor Vianu: Foundations of Databases .
Addison-Wesley, 1995. ISBN: 978-0-201-53771-0, available online at web‐
dam.inria.fr/Alice
[47] Nathan Marz: “ Cascalog,” cascalog.org.
[48] Dennis A. Benson, Ilene Karsch-Mizrachi, David J. Lipman, et al.: “ GenBank,”
Nucleic Acids Research, volume 36, Database issue, pages D25–D30, December 2007.
doi:10.1093/nar/gkm929
[49] Fons Rademakers: “ ROOT for Big Data Analysis ,” at Workshop on the Future of
Big Data Management, London, UK, June 2013.
Summary | 67

CHAPTER 3
Storage and Retrieval
Wer Ordnung hält, ist nur zu faul zum Suchen.
(If you keep things tidily ordered, you’re just too lazy to go searching.)
—German proverb
On the most fundamental level, a database needs to do two things: when you give it
some data, it should store the data, and when you ask it again later, it should give the
data back to you.
In Chapter 2  we discussed data models and query languages—i.e., the format in
which you (the application developer) give the database your data, and the mecha‐
nism by which you can ask for it again later. In this chapter we discuss the same from
the database’s point of view: how we can store the data that we’re given, and how we
can find it again when we’re asked for it.
Why should you, as an application developer, care how the database handles storage
and retrieval internally? You’re probably not going to implement your own storage
engine from scratch, but you do need to select a storage engine that is appropriate for
your application, from the many that are available. In order to tune a storage engine
to perform well on your kind of workload, you need to have a rough idea of what the
storage engine is doing under the hood.
In particular, there is a big difference between storage engines that are optimized for
transactional workloads and those that are optimized for analytics. We will explore
that distinction later in “Transaction Processing or Analytics?” on page 90, and in
“Column-Oriented Storage” on page 95 we’ll discuss a family of storage engines that
is optimized for analytics.
However, first we’ll start this chapter by talking about storage engines that are used in
the kinds of databases that you’re probably familiar with: traditional relational data‐
bases, and also most so-called NoSQL databases. We will examine two families of
69

storage engines: log-structured storage engines, and page-oriented storage engines
such as B-trees.
Data Structures That Power Your Database
Consider the world’s simplest database, implemented as two Bash functions:
#!/bin/bash
db_set () {
    echo "$1,$2" >> database
}
db_get () {
    grep "^$1," database | sed -e "s/^$1,//" | tail -n 1
}
These two functions implement a key-value store. You can call db_set key value ,
which will store key and value in the database. The key and value can be (almost)
anything you like—for example, the value could be a JSON document. You can then
call db_get key, which looks up the most recent value associated with that particular
key and returns it.
And it works:
$ db_set 123456 '{"name":"London","attractions":["Big Ben","London Eye"]}'
$ db_set 42 '{"name":"San Francisco","attractions":["Golden Gate Bridge"]}'
$ db_get 42
{"name":"San Francisco","attractions":["Golden Gate Bridge"]}
The underlying storage format is very simple: a text file where each line contains a
key-value pair, separated by a comma (roughly like a CSV file, ignoring escaping
issues). Every call to db_set appends to the end of the file, so if you update a key sev‐
eral times, the old versions of the value are not overwritten—you need to look at the
last occurrence of a key in a file to find the latest value (hence the tail -n 1  in
db_get):
$ db_set 42 '{"name":"San Francisco","attractions":["Exploratorium"]}'
$ db_get 42
{"name":"San Francisco","attractions":["Exploratorium"]}
$ cat database
123456,{"name":"London","attractions":["Big Ben","London Eye"]}
42,{"name":"San Francisco","attractions":["Golden Gate Bridge"]}
42,{"name":"San Francisco","attractions":["Exploratorium"]}
70 | Chapter 3: Storage and Retrieval

Our db_set function actually has pretty good performance for something that is so
simple, because appending to a file is generally very efficient. Similarly to what
db_set does, many databases internally use a log, which is an append-only data file.
Real databases have more issues to deal with (such as concurrency control, reclaim‐
ing disk space so that the log doesn’t grow forever, and handling errors and partially
written records), but the basic principle is the same. Logs are incredibly useful, and
we will encounter them several times in the rest of this book.
The word log is often used to refer to application logs, where an
application outputs text that describes what’s happening. In this
book, log is used in the more general sense: an append-only
sequence of records. It doesn’t have to be human-readable; it might
be binary and intended only for other programs to read.
On the other hand, our db_get function has terrible performance if you have a large
number of records in your database. Every time you want to look up a key, db_get
has to scan the entire database file from beginning to end, looking for occurrences of
the key. In algorithmic terms, the cost of a lookup is O(n): if you double the number
of records n in your database, a lookup takes twice as long. That’s not good.
In order to efficiently find the value for a particular key in the database, we need a
different data structure: an index. In this chapter we will look at a range of indexing
structures and see how they compare; the general idea behind them is to keep some
additional metadata on the side, which acts as a signpost and helps you to locate the
data you want. If you want to search the same data in several different ways, you may
need several different indexes on different parts of the data.
An index is an additional structure that is derived from the primary data. Many data‐
bases allow you to add and remove indexes, and this doesn’t affect the contents of the
database; it only affects the performance of queries. Maintaining additional structures
incurs overhead, especially on writes. For writes, it’s hard to beat the performance of
simply appending to a file, because that’s the simplest possible write operation. Any
kind of index usually slows down writes, because the index also needs to be updated
every time data is written.
This is an important trade-off in storage systems: well-chosen indexes speed up read
queries, but every index slows down writes. For this reason, databases don’t usually
index everything by default, but require you—the application developer or database
administrator—to choose indexes manually, using your knowledge of the applica‐
tion’s typical query patterns. You can then choose the indexes that give your applica‐
tion the greatest benefit, without introducing more overhead than necessary.
Data Structures That Power Your Database | 71

Hash Indexes
Let’s start with indexes for key-value data. This is not the only kind of data you can
index, but it’s very common, and it’s a useful building block for more complex
indexes.
Key-value stores are quite similar to the dictionary type that you can find in most
programming languages, and which is usually implemented as a hash map (hash
table). Hash maps are described in many algorithms textbooks [ 1, 2], so we won’t go
into detail of how they work here. Since we already have hash maps for our in-
memory data structures, why not use them to index our data on disk?
Let’s say our data storage consists only of appending to a file, as in the preceding
example. Then the simplest possible indexing strategy is this: keep an in-memory
hash map where every key is mapped to a byte offset in the data file—the location at
which the value can be found, as illustrated in Figure 3-1. Whenever you append a
new key-value pair to the file, you also update the hash map to reflect the offset of the
data you just wrote (this works both for inserting new keys and for updating existing
keys). When you want to look up a value, use the hash map to find the offset in the
data file, seek to that location, and read the value.
Figure 3-1. Storing a log of key-value pairs in a CSV-like format, indexed with an in-
memory hash map.
This may sound simplistic, but it is a viable approach. In fact, this is essentially what
Bitcask (the default storage engine in Riak) does [ 3]. Bitcask offers high-performance
reads and writes, subject to the requirement that all the keys fit in the available RAM,
since the hash map is kept completely in memory. The values can use more space
than there is available memory, since they can be loaded from disk with just one disk
72 | Chapter 3: Storage and Retrieval

seek. If that part of the data file is already in the filesystem cache, a read doesn’t
require any disk I/O at all.
A storage engine like Bitcask is well suited to situations where the value for each key
is updated frequently. For example, the key might be the URL of a cat video, and the
value might be the number of times it has been played (incremented every time
someone hits the play button). In this kind of workload, there are a lot of writes, but
there are not too many distinct keys—you have a large number of writes per key, but
it’s feasible to keep all keys in memory.
As described so far, we only ever append to a file—so how do we avoid eventually
running out of disk space? A good solution is to break the log into segments of a cer‐
tain size by closing a segment file when it reaches a certain size, and making subse‐
quent writes to a new segment file. We can then perform compaction on these
segments, as illustrated in Figure 3-2 . Compaction means throwing away duplicate
keys in the log, and keeping only the most recent update for each key.
Figure 3-2. Compaction of a key-value update log (counting the number of times each
cat video was played), retaining only the most recent value for each key.
Moreover, since compaction often makes segments much smaller (assuming that a
key is overwritten several times on average within one segment), we can also merge
several segments together at the same time as performing the compaction, as shown
in Figure 3-3 . Segments are never modified after they have been written, so the
merged segment is written to a new file. The merging and compaction of frozen seg‐
ments can be done in a background thread, and while it is going on, we can still con‐
tinue to serve read and write requests as normal, using the old segment files. After the
merging process is complete, we switch read requests to using the new merged seg‐
ment instead of the old segments—and then the old segment files can simply be
deleted.
Data Structures That Power Your Database | 73

Figure 3-3. Performing compaction and segment merging simultaneously.
Each segment now has its own in-memory hash table, mapping keys to file offsets. In
order to find the value for a key, we first check the most recent segment’s hash map;
if the key is not present we check the second-most-recent segment, and so on. The
merging process keeps the number of segments small, so lookups don’t need to check
many hash maps.
Lots of detail goes into making this simple idea work in practice. Briefly, some of the
issues that are important in a real implementation are:
File format
CSV is not the best format for a log. It’s faster and simpler to use a binary format
that first encodes the length of a string in bytes, followed by the raw string
(without need for escaping).
Deleting records
If you want to delete a key and its associated value, you have to append a special
deletion record to the data file (sometimes called a tombstone). When log seg‐
ments are merged, the tombstone tells the merging process to discard any previ‐
ous values for the deleted key.
Crash recovery
If the database is restarted, the in-memory hash maps are lost. In principle, you
can restore each segment’s hash map by reading the entire segment file from
beginning to end and noting the offset of the most recent value for every key as
you go along. However, that might take a long time if the segment files are large,
which would make server restarts painful. Bitcask speeds up recovery by storing
74 | Chapter 3: Storage and Retrieval

a snapshot of each segment’s hash map on disk, which can be loaded into mem‐
ory more quickly.
Partially written records
The database may crash at any time, including halfway through appending a
record to the log. Bitcask files include checksums, allowing such corrupted parts
of the log to be detected and ignored.
Concurrency control
As writes are appended to the log in a strictly sequential order, a common imple‐
mentation choice is to have only one writer thread. Data file segments are
append-only and otherwise immutable, so they can be read concurrently by mul‐
tiple threads.
An append-only log seems wasteful at first glance: why don’t you update the file in
place, overwriting the old value with the new value? But an append-only design turns
out to be good for several reasons:
• Appending and segment merging are sequential write operations, which are gen‐
erally much faster than random writes, especially on magnetic spinning-disk
hard drives. To some extent sequential writes are also preferable on flash-based
solid state drives (SSDs) [4]. We will discuss this issue further in “Comparing B-
Trees and LSM-Trees” on page 83 .
• Concurrency and crash recovery are much simpler if segment files are append-
only or immutable. For example, you don’t have to worry about the case where a
crash happened while a value was being overwritten, leaving you with a file con‐
taining part of the old and part of the new value spliced together.
• Merging old segments avoids the problem of data files getting fragmented over
time.
However, the hash table index also has limitations:
• The hash table must fit in memory, so if you have a very large number of keys,
you’re out of luck. In principle, you could maintain a hash map on disk, but
unfortunately it is difficult to make an on-disk hash map perform well. It
requires a lot of random access I/O, it is expensive to grow when it becomes full,
and hash collisions require fiddly logic [5].
• Range queries are not efficient. For example, you cannot easily scan over all keys
between kitty00000 and kitty99999—you’d have to look up each key individu‐
ally in the hash maps.
In the next section we will look at an indexing structure that doesn’t have those limi‐
tations. 
Data Structures That Power Your Database | 75

SSTables and LSM-Trees
In Figure 3-3, each log-structured storage segment is a sequence of key-value pairs.
These pairs appear in the order that they were written, and values later in the log take
precedence over values for the same key earlier in the log. Apart from that, the order
of key-value pairs in the file does not matter.
Now we can make a simple change to the format of our segment files: we require that
the sequence of key-value pairs is sorted by key . At first glance, that requirement
seems to break our ability to use sequential writes, but we’ll get to that in a moment.
We call this format Sorted String Table , or SSTable for short. We also require that
each key only appears once within each merged segment file (the compaction process
already ensures that). SSTables have several big advantages over log segments with
hash indexes:
1. Merging segments is simple and efficient, even if the files are bigger than the
available memory. The approach is like the one used in the mergesort algorithm
and is illustrated in Figure 3-4: you start reading the input files side by side, look
at the first key in each file, copy the lowest key (according to the sort order) to
the output file, and repeat. This produces a new merged segment file, also sorted
by key.
Figure 3-4. Merging several SSTable segments, retaining only the most recent value
for each key.
76 | Chapter 3: Storage and Retrieval

i. If all keys and values had a fixed size, you could use binary search on a segment file and avoid the in-
memory index entirely. However, they are usually variable-length in practice, which makes it difficult to tell
where one record ends and the next one starts if you don’t have an index.
What if the same key appears in several input segments? Remember that each
segment contains all the values written to the database during some period of
time. This means that all the values in one input segment must be more recent
than all the values in the other segment (assuming that we always merge adjacent
segments). When multiple segments contain the same key, we can keep the value
from the most recent segment and discard the values in older segments.
2. In order to find a particular key in the file, you no longer need to keep an index
of all the keys in memory. See Figure 3-5 for an example: say you’re looking for
the key handiwork, but you don’t know the exact offset of that key in the segment
file. However, you do know the offsets for the keys handbag and handsome, and
because of the sorting you know that handiwork must appear between those two.
This means you can jump to the offset for handbag and scan from there until you
find handiwork (or not, if the key is not present in the file).
Figure 3-5. An SSTable with an in-memory index.
You still need an in-memory index to tell you the offsets for some of the keys, but
it can be sparse: one key for every few kilobytes of segment file is sufficient,
because a few kilobytes can be scanned very quickly.i
3. Since read requests need to scan over several key-value pairs in the requested
range anyway, it is possible to group those records into a block and compress it
before writing it to disk (indicated by the shaded area in Figure 3-5). Each entry
of the sparse in-memory index then points at the start of a compressed block.
Besides saving disk space, compression also reduces the I/O bandwidth use.
Data Structures That Power Your Database | 77

Constructing and maintaining SSTables
Fine so far—but how do you get your data to be sorted by key in the first place? Our
incoming writes can occur in any order.
Maintaining a sorted structure on disk is possible (see “B-Trees”  on page 79), but
maintaining it in memory is much easier. There are plenty of well-known tree data
structures that you can use, such as red-black trees or AVL trees [ 2]. With these data
structures, you can insert keys in any order and read them back in sorted order.
We can now make our storage engine work as follows:
• When a write comes in, add it to an in-memory balanced tree data structure (for
example, a red-black tree). This in-memory tree is sometimes called a memtable.
• When the memtable gets bigger than some threshold—typically a few megabytes
—write it out to disk as an SSTable file. This can be done efficiently because the
tree already maintains the key-value pairs sorted by key. The new SSTable file
becomes the most recent segment of the database. While the SSTable is being
written out to disk, writes can continue to a new memtable instance.
• In order to serve a read request, first try to find the key in the memtable, then in
the most recent on-disk segment, then in the next-older segment, etc.
• From time to time, run a merging and compaction process in the background to
combine segment files and to discard overwritten or deleted values.
This scheme works very well. It only suffers from one problem: if the database
crashes, the most recent writes (which are in the memtable but not yet written out to
disk) are lost. In order to avoid that problem, we can keep a separate log on disk to
which every write is immediately appended, just like in the previous section. That log
is not in sorted order, but that doesn’t matter, because its only purpose is to restore
the memtable after a crash. Every time the memtable is written out to an SSTable, the
corresponding log can be discarded.
Making an LSM-tree out of SSTables
The algorithm described here is essentially what is used in LevelDB [ 6] and RocksDB
[7], key-value storage engine libraries that are designed to be embedded into other
applications. Among other things, LevelDB can be used in Riak as an alternative to
Bitcask. Similar storage engines are used in Cassandra and HBase [ 8], both of which
were inspired by Google’s Bigtable paper [ 9] (which introduced the terms SSTable
and memtable).
Originally this indexing structure was described by Patrick O’Neil et al. under the
name Log-Structured Merge-Tree  (or LSM-Tree) [ 10], building on earlier work on
78 | Chapter 3: Storage and Retrieval

log-structured filesystems [ 11]. Storage engines that are based on this principle of
merging and compacting sorted files are often called LSM storage engines.
Lucene, an indexing engine for full-text search used by Elasticsearch and Solr, uses a
similar method for storing its term dictionary [12, 13]. A full-text index is much more
complex than a key-value index but is based on a similar idea: given a word in a
search query, find all the documents (web pages, product descriptions, etc.) that
mention the word. This is implemented with a key-value structure where the key is a
word (a term) and the value is the list of IDs of all the documents that contain the
word (the postings list). In Lucene, this mapping from term to postings list is kept in
SSTable-like sorted files, which are merged in the background as needed [14].
Performance optimizations
As always, a lot of detail goes into making a storage engine perform well in practice.
For example, the LSM-tree algorithm can be slow when looking up keys that do not
exist in the database: you have to check the memtable, then the segments all the way
back to the oldest (possibly having to read from disk for each one) before you can be
sure that the key does not exist. In order to optimize this kind of access, storage
engines often use additional Bloom filters [15]. (A Bloom filter is a memory-efficient
data structure for approximating the contents of a set. It can tell you if a key does not
appear in the database, and thus saves many unnecessary disk reads for nonexistent
keys.)
There are also different strategies to determine the order and timing of how SSTables
are compacted and merged. The most common options are size-tiered and leveled
compaction. LevelDB and RocksDB use leveled compaction (hence the name of Lev‐
elDB), HBase uses size-tiered, and Cassandra supports both [ 16]. In size-tiered com‐
paction, newer and smaller SSTables are successively merged into older and larger
SSTables. In leveled compaction, the key range is split up into smaller SSTables and
older data is moved into separate “levels,” which allows the compaction to proceed
more incrementally and use less disk space.
Even though there are many subtleties, the basic idea of LSM-trees—keeping a cas‐
cade of SSTables that are merged in the background—is simple and effective. Even
when the dataset is much bigger than the available memory it continues to work well.
Since data is stored in sorted order, you can efficiently perform range queries (scan‐
ning all keys above some minimum and up to some maximum), and because the disk
writes are sequential the LSM-tree can support remarkably high write throughput. 
B-Trees
The log-structured indexes we have discussed so far are gaining acceptance, but they
are not the most common type of index. The most widely used indexing structure is
quite different: the B-tree.
Data Structures That Power Your Database | 79

Introduced in 1970 [ 17] and called “ubiquitous” less than 10 years later [ 18], B-trees
have stood the test of time very well. They remain the standard index implementation
in almost all relational databases, and many nonrelational databases use them too.
Like SSTables, B-trees keep key-value pairs sorted by key, which allows efficient key-
value lookups and range queries. But that’s where the similarity ends: B-trees have a
very different design philosophy.
The log-structured indexes we saw earlier break the database down into variable-size
segments, typically several megabytes or more in size, and always write a segment
sequentially. By contrast, B-trees break the database down into fixed-size blocks or
pages, traditionally 4 KB in size (sometimes bigger), and read or write one page at a
time. This design corresponds more closely to the underlying hardware, as disks are
also arranged in fixed-size blocks.
Each page can be identified using an address or location, which allows one page to
refer to another—similar to a pointer, but on disk instead of in memory. We can use
these page references to construct a tree of pages, as illustrated in Figure 3-6.
Figure 3-6. Looking up a key using a B-tree index.
One page is designated as the root of the B-tree; whenever you want to look up a key
in the index, you start here. The page contains several keys and references to child
pages. Each child is responsible for a continuous range of keys, and the keys between
the references indicate where the boundaries between those ranges lie.
In the example in Figure 3-6, we are looking for the key 251, so we know that we need
to follow the page reference between the boundaries 200 and 300. That takes us to a
similar-looking page that further breaks down the 200–300 range into subranges.
80 | Chapter 3: Storage and Retrieval

ii. Inserting a new key into a B-tree is reasonably intuitive, but deleting one (while keeping the tree balanced)
is somewhat more involved [2].
Eventually we get down to a page containing individual keys (a leaf page ), which
either contains the value for each key inline or contains references to the pages where
the values can be found.
The number of references to child pages in one page of the B-tree is called the
branching factor. For example, in Figure 3-6 the branching factor is six. In practice,
the branching factor depends on the amount of space required to store the page refer‐
ences and the range boundaries, but typically it is several hundred.
If you want to update the value for an existing key in a B-tree, you search for the leaf
page containing that key, change the value in that page, and write the page back to
disk (any references to that page remain valid). If you want to add a new key, you
need to find the page whose range encompasses the new key and add it to that page.
If there isn’t enough free space in the page to accommodate the new key, it is split
into two half-full pages, and the parent page is updated to account for the new subdi‐
vision of key ranges—see Figure 3-7.ii
Figure 3-7. Growing a B-tree by splitting a page.
This algorithm ensures that the tree remains balanced: a B-tree with n keys always
has a depth of O(log n). Most databases can fit into a B-tree that is three or four levels
deep, so you don’t need to follow many page references to find the page you are look‐
ing for. (A four-level tree of 4 KB pages with a branching factor of 500 can store up to
256 TB.)
Data Structures That Power Your Database | 81

Making B-trees reliable
The basic underlying write operation of a B-tree is to overwrite a page on disk with
new data. It is assumed that the overwrite does not change the location of the page;
i.e., all references to that page remain intact when the page is overwritten. This is in
stark contrast to log-structured indexes such as LSM-trees, which only append to files
(and eventually delete obsolete files) but never modify files in place.
You can think of overwriting a page on disk as an actual hardware operation. On a
magnetic hard drive, this means moving the disk head to the right place, waiting for
the right position on the spinning platter to come around, and then overwriting the
appropriate sector with new data. On SSDs, what happens is somewhat more compli‐
cated, due to the fact that an SSD must erase and rewrite fairly large blocks of a stor‐
age chip at a time [19].
Moreover, some operations require several different pages to be overwritten. For
example, if you split a page because an insertion caused it to be overfull, you need to
write the two pages that were split, and also overwrite their parent page to update the
references to the two child pages. This is a dangerous operation, because if the data‐
base crashes after only some of the pages have been written, you end up with a cor‐
rupted index (e.g., there may be an orphan page that is not a child of any parent).
In order to make the database resilient to crashes, it is common for B-tree implemen‐
tations to include an additional data structure on disk: a write-ahead log (WAL, also
known as a redo log). This is an append-only file to which every B-tree modification
must be written before it can be applied to the pages of the tree itself. When the data‐
base comes back up after a crash, this log is used to restore the B-tree back to a con‐
sistent state [5, 20].
An additional complication of updating pages in place is that careful concurrency
control is required if multiple threads are going to access the B-tree at the same time
—otherwise a thread may see the tree in an inconsistent state. This is typically done
by protecting the tree’s data structures with latches (lightweight locks). Log-
structured approaches are simpler in this regard, because they do all the merging in
the background without interfering with incoming queries and atomically swap old
segments for new segments from time to time.
B-tree optimizations
As B-trees have been around for so long, it’s not surprising that many optimizations
have been developed over the years. To mention just a few:
• Instead of overwriting pages and maintaining a WAL for crash recovery, some
databases (like LMDB) use a copy-on-write scheme [ 21]. A modified page is
written to a different location, and a new version of the parent pages in the tree is
created, pointing at the new location. This approach is also useful for concur‐
82 | Chapter 3: Storage and Retrieval

iii. This variant is sometimes known as a B + tree, although the optimization is so common that it often isn’t
distinguished from other B-tree variants.
rency control, as we shall see in “Snapshot Isolation and Repeatable Read” on
page 237.
• We can save space in pages by not storing the entire key, but abbreviating it.
Especially in pages on the interior of the tree, keys only need to provide enough
information to act as boundaries between key ranges. Packing more keys into a
page allows the tree to have a higher branching factor, and thus fewer levels.iii
• In general, pages can be positioned anywhere on disk; there is nothing requiring
pages with nearby key ranges to be nearby on disk. If a query needs to scan over a
large part of the key range in sorted order, that page-by-page layout can be ineffi‐
cient, because a disk seek may be required for every page that is read. Many B-
tree implementations therefore try to lay out the tree so that leaf pages appear in
sequential order on disk. However, it’s difficult to maintain that order as the tree
grows. By contrast, since LSM-trees rewrite large segments of the storage in one
go during merging, it’s easier for them to keep sequential keys close to each other
on disk.
• Additional pointers have been added to the tree. For example, each leaf page may
have references to its sibling pages to the left and right, which allows scanning
keys in order without jumping back to parent pages.
• B-tree variants such as fractal trees  [22] borrow some log-structured ideas to
reduce disk seeks (and they have nothing to do with fractals). 
Comparing B-Trees and LSM-Trees
Even though B-tree implementations are generally more mature than LSM-tree
implementations, LSM-trees are also interesting due to their performance character‐
istics. As a rule of thumb, LSM-trees are typically faster for writes, whereas B-trees
are thought to be faster for reads [ 23]. Reads are typically slower on LSM-trees
because they have to check several different data structures and SSTables at different
stages of compaction.
However, benchmarks are often inconclusive and sensitive to details of the workload.
You need to test systems with your particular workload in order to make a valid com‐
parison. In this section we will briefly discuss a few things that are worth considering
when measuring the performance of a storage engine.
Data Structures That Power Your Database | 83

Advantages of LSM-trees
A B-tree index must write every piece of data at least twice: once to the write-ahead
log, and once to the tree page itself (and perhaps again as pages are split). There is
also overhead from having to write an entire page at a time, even if only a few bytes in
that page changed. Some storage engines even overwrite the same page twice in order
to avoid ending up with a partially updated page in the event of a power failure [ 24,
25].
Log-structured indexes also rewrite data multiple times due to repeated compaction
and merging of SSTables. This effect—one write to the database resulting in multiple
writes to the disk over the course of the database’s lifetime—is known as write ampli‐
fication. It is of particular concern on SSDs, which can only overwrite blocks a limi‐
ted number of times before wearing out.
In write-heavy applications, the performance bottleneck might be the rate at which
the database can write to disk. In this case, write amplification has a direct perfor‐
mance cost: the more that a storage engine writes to disk, the fewer writes per second
it can handle within the available disk bandwidth.
Moreover, LSM-trees are typically able to sustain higher write throughput than B-
trees, partly because they sometimes have lower write amplification (although this
depends on the storage engine configuration and workload), and partly because they
sequentially write compact SSTable files rather than having to overwrite several pages
in the tree [ 26]. This difference is particularly important on magnetic hard drives,
where sequential writes are much faster than random writes.
LSM-trees can be compressed better, and thus often produce smaller files on disk
than B-trees. B-tree storage engines leave some disk space unused due to fragmenta‐
tion: when a page is split or when a row cannot fit into an existing page, some space
in a page remains unused. Since LSM-trees are not page-oriented and periodically
rewrite SSTables to remove fragmentation, they have lower storage overheads, espe‐
cially when using leveled compaction [27].
On many SSDs, the firmware internally uses a log-structured algorithm to turn ran‐
dom writes into sequential writes on the underlying storage chips, so the impact of
the storage engine’s write pattern is less pronounced [ 19]. However, lower write
amplification and reduced fragmentation are still advantageous on SSDs: represent‐
ing data more compactly allows more read and write requests within the available I/O
bandwidth.
Downsides of LSM-trees
A downside of log-structured storage is that the compaction process can sometimes
interfere with the performance of ongoing reads and writes. Even though storage
engines try to perform compaction incrementally and without affecting concurrent
84 | Chapter 3: Storage and Retrieval

access, disks have limited resources, so it can easily happen that a request needs to
wait while the disk finishes an expensive compaction operation. The impact on
throughput and average response time is usually small, but at higher percentiles (see
“Describing Performance” on page 13) the response time of queries to log-structured
storage engines can sometimes be quite high, and B-trees can be more predictable
[28].
Another issue with compaction arises at high write throughput: the disk’s finite write
bandwidth needs to be shared between the initial write (logging and flushing a
memtable to disk) and the compaction threads running in the background. When
writing to an empty database, the full disk bandwidth can be used for the initial write,
but the bigger the database gets, the more disk bandwidth is required for compaction.
If write throughput is high and compaction is not configured carefully, it can happen
that compaction cannot keep up with the rate of incoming writes. In this case, the
number of unmerged segments on disk keeps growing until you run out of disk
space, and reads also slow down because they need to check more segment files. Typ‐
ically, SSTable-based storage engines do not throttle the rate of incoming writes, even
if compaction cannot keep up, so you need explicit monitoring to detect this situa‐
tion [29, 30].
An advantage of B-trees is that each key exists in exactly one place in the index,
whereas a log-structured storage engine may have multiple copies of the same key in
different segments. This aspect makes B-trees attractive in databases that want to
offer strong transactional semantics: in many relational databases, transaction isola‐
tion is implemented using locks on ranges of keys, and in a B-tree index, those locks
can be directly attached to the tree [5]. In Chapter 7 we will discuss this point in more
detail.
B-trees are very ingrained in the architecture of databases and provide consistently
good performance for many workloads, so it’s unlikely that they will go away anytime
soon. In new datastores, log-structured indexes are becoming increasingly popular.
There is no quick and easy rule for determining which type of storage engine is better
for your use case, so it is worth testing empirically. 
Other Indexing Structures
So far we have only discussed key-value indexes, which are like a primary key index in
the relational model. A primary key uniquely identifies one row in a relational table,
or one document in a document database, or one vertex in a graph database. Other
records in the database can refer to that row/document/vertex by its primary key (or
ID), and the index is used to resolve such references.
It is also very common to have secondary indexes . In relational databases, you can
create several secondary indexes on the same table using the CREATE INDEX  com‐
Data Structures That Power Your Database | 85

mand, and they are often crucial for performing joins efficiently. For example, in
Figure 2-1  in Chapter 2  you would most likely have a secondary index on the
user_id columns so that you can find all the rows belonging to the same user in each
of the tables.
A secondary index can easily be constructed from a key-value index. The main differ‐
ence is that keys are not unique; i.e., there might be many rows (documents, vertices)
with the same key. This can be solved in two ways: either by making each value in the
index a list of matching row identifiers (like a postings list in a full-text index) or by
making each key unique by appending a row identifier to it. Either way, both B-trees
and log-structured indexes can be used as secondary indexes.
Storing values within the index
The key in an index is the thing that queries search for, but the value can be one of
two things: it could be the actual row (document, vertex) in question, or it could be a
reference to the row stored elsewhere. In the latter case, the place where rows are
stored is known as a heap file , and it stores data in no particular order (it may be
append-only, or it may keep track of deleted rows in order to overwrite them with
new data later). The heap file approach is common because it avoids duplicating data
when multiple secondary indexes are present: each index just references a location in
the heap file, and the actual data is kept in one place.
When updating a value without changing the key, the heap file approach can be quite
efficient: the record can be overwritten in place, provided that the new value is not
larger than the old value. The situation is more complicated if the new value is larger,
as it probably needs to be moved to a new location in the heap where there is enough
space. In that case, either all indexes need to be updated to point at the new heap
location of the record, or a forwarding pointer is left behind in the old heap location
[5].
In some situations, the extra hop from the index to the heap file is too much of a per‐
formance penalty for reads, so it can be desirable to store the indexed row directly
within an index. This is known as a clustered index . For example, in MySQL’s
InnoDB storage engine, the primary key of a table is always a clustered index, and
secondary indexes refer to the primary key (rather than a heap file location) [ 31]. In
SQL Server, you can specify one clustered index per table [32].
A compromise between a clustered index (storing all row data within the index) and
a nonclustered index (storing only references to the data within the index) is known
as a covering index or index with included columns, which stores some of a table’s col‐
umns within the index [ 33]. This allows some queries to be answered by using the
index alone (in which case, the index is said to cover the query) [32].
86 | Chapter 3: Storage and Retrieval

As with any kind of duplication of data, clustered and covering indexes can speed up
reads, but they require additional storage and can add overhead on writes. Databases
also need to go to additional effort to enforce transactional guarantees, because appli‐
cations should not see inconsistencies due to the duplication.
Multi-column indexes
The indexes discussed so far only map a single key to a value. That is not sufficient if
we need to query multiple columns of a table (or multiple fields in a document)
simultaneously.
The most common type of multi-column index is called a concatenated index, which
simply combines several fields into one key by appending one column to another (the
index definition specifies in which order the fields are concatenated). This is like an
old-fashioned paper phone book, which provides an index from ( lastname, first‐
name) to phone number. Due to the sort order, the index can be used to find all the
people with a particular last name, or all the people with a particular lastname-
firstname combination. However, the index is useless if you want to find all the peo‐
ple with a particular first name.
Multi-dimensional indexes are a more general way of querying several columns at
once, which is particularly important for geospatial data. For example, a restaurant-
search website may have a database containing the latitude and longitude of each res‐
taurant. When a user is looking at the restaurants on a map, the website needs to
search for all the restaurants within the rectangular map area that the user is cur‐
rently viewing. This requires a two-dimensional range query like the following:
SELECT * FROM restaurants WHERE latitude  > 51.4946 AND latitude  < 51.5079
                            AND longitude > -0.1162 AND longitude < -0.1004;
A standard B-tree or LSM-tree index is not able to answer that kind of query effi‐
ciently: it can give you either all the restaurants in a range of latitudes (but at any lon‐
gitude), or all the restaurants in a range of longitudes (but anywhere between the
North and South poles), but not both simultaneously.
One option is to translate a two-dimensional location into a single number using a
space-filling curve, and then to use a regular B-tree index [ 34]. More commonly, spe‐
cialized spatial indexes such as R-trees are used. For example, PostGIS implements
geospatial indexes as R-trees using PostgreSQL’s Generalized Search Tree indexing
facility [35]. We don’t have space to describe R-trees in detail here, but there is plenty
of literature on them.
An interesting idea is that multi-dimensional indexes are not just for geographic
locations. For example, on an ecommerce website you could use a three-dimensional
index on the dimensions (red, green, blue) to search for products in a certain range of
colors, or in a database of weather observations you could have a two-dimensional
Data Structures That Power Your Database | 87

index on ( date, temperature) in order to efficiently search for all the observations
during the year 2013 where the temperature was between 25 and 30 ℃. With a one-
dimensional index, you would have to either scan over all the records from 2013
(regardless of temperature) and then filter them by temperature, or vice versa. A 2D
index could narrow down by timestamp and temperature simultaneously. This tech‐
nique is used by HyperDex [36].
Full-text search and fuzzy indexes
All the indexes discussed so far assume that you have exact data and allow you to
query for exact values of a key, or a range of values of a key with a sort order. What
they don’t allow you to do is search for similar keys, such as misspelled words. Such
fuzzy querying requires different techniques.
For example, full-text search engines commonly allow a search for one word to be
expanded to include synonyms of the word, to ignore grammatical variations of
words, and to search for occurrences of words near each other in the same document,
and support various other features that depend on linguistic analysis of the text. To
cope with typos in documents or queries, Lucene is able to search text for words
within a certain edit distance (an edit distance of 1 means that one letter has been
added, removed, or replaced) [37].
As mentioned in “Making an LSM-tree out of SSTables” on page 78, Lucene uses a
SSTable-like structure for its term dictionary. This structure requires a small in-
memory index that tells queries at which offset in the sorted file they need to look for
a key. In LevelDB, this in-memory index is a sparse collection of some of the keys,
but in Lucene, the in-memory index is a finite state automaton over the characters in
the keys, similar to a trie [38]. This automaton can be transformed into a Levenshtein
automaton, which supports efficient search for words within a given edit distance
[39].
Other fuzzy search techniques go in the direction of document classification and
machine learning. See an information retrieval textbook for more detail [e.g., 40].
Keeping everything in memory
The data structures discussed so far in this chapter have all been answers to the limi‐
tations of disks. Compared to main memory, disks are awkward to deal with. With
both magnetic disks and SSDs, data on disk needs to be laid out carefully if you want
good performance on reads and writes. However, we tolerate this awkwardness
because disks have two significant advantages: they are durable (their contents are
not lost if the power is turned off), and they have a lower cost per gigabyte than
RAM.
As RAM becomes cheaper, the cost-per-gigabyte argument is eroded. Many datasets
are simply not that big, so it’s quite feasible to keep them entirely in memory, poten‐
88 | Chapter 3: Storage and Retrieval

tially distributed across several machines. This has led to the development of in-
memory databases.
Some in-memory key-value stores, such as Memcached, are intended for caching use
only, where it’s acceptable for data to be lost if a machine is restarted. But other in-
memory databases aim for durability, which can be achieved with special hardware
(such as battery-powered RAM), by writing a log of changes to disk, by writing peri‐
odic snapshots to disk, or by replicating the in-memory state to other machines.
When an in-memory database is restarted, it needs to reload its state, either from disk
or over the network from a replica (unless special hardware is used). Despite writing
to disk, it’s still an in-memory database, because the disk is merely used as an
append-only log for durability, and reads are served entirely from memory. Writing
to disk also has operational advantages: files on disk can easily be backed up,
inspected, and analyzed by external utilities.
Products such as VoltDB, MemSQL, and Oracle TimesTen are in-memory databases
with a relational model, and the vendors claim that they can offer big performance
improvements by removing all the overheads associated with managing on-disk data
structures [ 41, 42]. RAMCloud is an open source, in-memory key-value store with
durability (using a log-structured approach for the data in memory as well as the data
on disk) [43]. Redis and Couchbase provide weak durability by writing to disk asyn‐
chronously.
Counterintuitively, the performance advantage of in-memory databases is not due to
the fact that they don’t need to read from disk. Even a disk-based storage engine may
never need to read from disk if you have enough memory, because the operating sys‐
tem caches recently used disk blocks in memory anyway. Rather, they can be faster
because they can avoid the overheads of encoding in-memory data structures in a
form that can be written to disk [44].
Besides performance, another interesting area for in-memory databases is providing
data models that are difficult to implement with disk-based indexes. For example,
Redis offers a database-like interface to various data structures such as priority
queues and sets. Because it keeps all data in memory, its implementation is compara‐
tively simple.
Recent research indicates that an in-memory database architecture could be extended
to support datasets larger than the available memory, without bringing back the over‐
heads of a disk-centric architecture [ 45]. The so-called anti-caching approach works
by evicting the least recently used data from memory to disk when there is not
enough memory, and loading it back into memory when it is accessed again in the
future. This is similar to what operating systems do with virtual memory and swap
files, but the database can manage memory more efficiently than the OS, as it can
work at the granularity of individual records rather than entire memory pages. This
Data Structures That Power Your Database | 89

approach still requires indexes to fit entirely in memory, though (like the Bitcask
example at the beginning of the chapter).
Further changes to storage engine design will probably be needed if non-volatile
memory (NVM) technologies become more widely adopted [ 46]. At present, this is a
new area of research, but it is worth keeping an eye on in the future. 
Transaction Processing or Analytics?
In the early days of business data processing, a write to the database typically corre‐
sponded to a commercial transaction  taking place: making a sale, placing an order
with a supplier, paying an employee’s salary, etc. As databases expanded into areas
that didn’t involve money changing hands, the term transaction nevertheless stuck,
referring to a group of reads and writes that form a logical unit.
A transaction needn’t necessarily have ACID (atomicity, consis‐
tency, isolation, and durability) properties. Transaction processing
just means allowing clients to make low-latency reads and writes—
as opposed to batch processing  jobs, which only run periodically
(for example, once per day). We discuss the ACID properties in
Chapter 7 and batch processing in Chapter 10.
Even though databases started being used for many different kinds of data—com‐
ments on blog posts, actions in a game, contacts in an address book, etc.—the basic
access pattern remained similar to processing business transactions. An application
typically looks up a small number of records by some key, using an index. Records
are inserted or updated based on the user’s input. Because these applications are
interactive, the access pattern became known as online transaction processing
(OLTP).
However, databases also started being increasingly used for data analytics, which has
very different access patterns. Usually an analytic query needs to scan over a huge
number of records, only reading a few columns per record, and calculates aggregate
statistics (such as count, sum, or average) rather than returning the raw data to the
user. For example, if your data is a table of sales transactions, then analytic queries
might be:
• What was the total revenue of each of our stores in January?
• How many more bananas than usual did we sell during our latest promotion?
• Which brand of baby food is most often purchased together with brand X
diapers?
90 | Chapter 3: Storage and Retrieval

iv. The meaning of online in OLAP is unclear; it probably refers to the fact that queries are not just for prede‐
fined reports, but that analysts use the OLAP system interactively for explorative queries.
These queries are often written by business analysts, and feed into reports that help
the management of a company make better decisions ( business intelligence). In order
to differentiate this pattern of using databases from transaction processing, it has
been called online analytic processing  (OLAP) [ 47].iv The difference between OLTP
and OLAP is not always clear-cut, but some typical characteristics are listed in
Table 3-1.
Table 3-1. Comparing characteristics of transaction processing versus analytic systems
Property Transaction processing systems (OLTP) Analytic systems (OLAP)
Main read pattern Small number of records per query, fetched by key Aggregate over large number of records
Main write pattern Random-access, low-latency writes from user input Bulk import (ETL) or event stream
Primarily used by End user/customer, via web application Internal analyst, for decision support
What data represents Latest state of data (current point in time) History of events that happened over time
Dataset size Gigabytes to terabytes Terabytes to petabytes
At first, the same databases were used for both transaction processing and analytic
queries. SQL turned out to be quite flexible in this regard: it works well for OLTP-
type queries as well as OLAP-type queries. Nevertheless, in the late 1980s and early
1990s, there was a trend for companies to stop using their OLTP systems for analytics
purposes, and to run the analytics on a separate database instead. This separate data‐
base was called a data warehouse.
Data Warehousing
An enterprise may have dozens of different transaction processing systems: systems
powering the customer-facing website, controlling point of sale (checkout) systems in
physical stores, tracking inventory in warehouses, planning routes for vehicles, man‐
aging suppliers, administering employees, etc. Each of these systems is complex and
needs a team of people to maintain it, so the systems end up operating mostly auton‐
omously from each other.
These OLTP systems are usually expected to be highly available and to process trans‐
actions with low latency, since they are often critical to the operation of the business.
Database administrators therefore closely guard their OLTP databases. They are usu‐
ally reluctant to let business analysts run ad hoc analytic queries on an OLTP data‐
base, since those queries are often expensive, scanning large parts of the dataset,
which can harm the performance of concurrently executing transactions.
Transaction Processing or Analytics? | 91

A data warehouse, by contrast, is a separate database that analysts can query to their
hearts’ content, without affecting OLTP operations [ 48]. The data warehouse con‐
tains a read-only copy of the data in all the various OLTP systems in the company.
Data is extracted from OLTP databases (using either a periodic data dump or a con‐
tinuous stream of updates), transformed into an analysis-friendly schema, cleaned
up, and then loaded into the data warehouse. This process of getting data into the
warehouse is known as Extract–Transform–Load  (ETL) and is illustrated in
Figure 3-8.
Figure 3-8. Simplified outline of ETL into a data warehouse.
Data warehouses now exist in almost all large enterprises, but in small companies
they are almost unheard of. This is probably because most small companies don’t
have so many different OLTP systems, and most small companies have a small
amount of data—small enough that it can be queried in a conventional SQL database,
or even analyzed in a spreadsheet. In a large company, a lot of heavy lifting is
required to do something that is simple in a small company.
A big advantage of using a separate data warehouse, rather than querying OLTP sys‐
tems directly for analytics, is that the data warehouse can be optimized for analytic
access patterns. It turns out that the indexing algorithms discussed in the first half of
this chapter work well for OLTP, but are not very good at answering analytic queries.
92 | Chapter 3: Storage and Retrieval

In the rest of this chapter we will look at storage engines that are optimized for ana‐
lytics instead.
The divergence between OLTP databases and data warehouses
The data model of a data warehouse is most commonly relational, because SQL is
generally a good fit for analytic queries. There are many graphical data analysis tools
that generate SQL queries, visualize the results, and allow analysts to explore the data
(through operations such as drill-down and slicing and dicing).
On the surface, a data warehouse and a relational OLTP database look similar,
because they both have a SQL query interface. However, the internals of the systems
can look quite different, because they are optimized for very different query patterns.
Many database vendors now focus on supporting either transaction processing or
analytics workloads, but not both.
Some databases, such as Microsoft SQL Server and SAP HANA, have support for
transaction processing and data warehousing in the same product. However, they are
increasingly becoming two separate storage and query engines, which happen to be
accessible through a common SQL interface [49, 50, 51].
Data warehouse vendors such as Teradata, Vertica, SAP HANA, and ParAccel typi‐
cally sell their systems under expensive commercial licenses. Amazon RedShift is a
hosted version of ParAccel. More recently, a plethora of open source SQL-on-
Hadoop projects have emerged; they are young but aiming to compete with commer‐
cial data warehouse systems. These include Apache Hive, Spark SQL, Cloudera
Impala, Facebook Presto, Apache Tajo, and Apache Drill [ 52, 53]. Some of them are
based on ideas from Google’s Dremel [ 54].
Stars and Snowflakes: Schemas for Analytics
As explored in Chapter 2, a wide range of different data models are used in the realm
of transaction processing, depending on the needs of the application. On the other
hand, in analytics, there is much less diversity of data models. Many data warehouses
are used in a fairly formulaic style, known as a star schema  (also known as dimen‐
sional modeling [55]).
The example schema in Figure 3-9 shows a data warehouse that might be found at a
grocery retailer. At the center of the schema is a so-called fact table (in this example,
it is called fact_sales). Each row of the fact table represents an event that occurred
at a particular time (here, each row represents a customer’s purchase of a product). If
we were analyzing website traffic rather than retail sales, each row might represent a
page view or a click by a user.
Transaction Processing or Analytics? | 93

Figure 3-9. Example of a star schema for use in a data warehouse.
Usually, facts are captured as individual events, because this allows maximum flexi‐
bility of analysis later. However, this means that the fact table can become extremely
large. A big enterprise like Apple, Walmart, or eBay may have tens of petabytes of
transaction history in its data warehouse, most of which is in fact tables [56].
Some of the columns in the fact table are attributes, such as the price at which the
product was sold and the cost of buying it from the supplier (allowing the profit mar‐
gin to be calculated). Other columns in the fact table are foreign key references to
other tables, called dimension tables. As each row in the fact table represents an event,
the dimensions represent the who, what, where, when, how, and why of the event.
For example, in Figure 3-9, one of the dimensions is the product that was sold. Each
row in the dim_product table represents one type of product that is for sale, including
94 | Chapter 3: Storage and Retrieval

its stock-keeping unit (SKU), description, brand name, category, fat content, package
size, etc. Each row in the fact_sales table uses a foreign key to indicate which prod‐
uct was sold in that particular transaction. (For simplicity, if the customer buys sev‐
eral different products at once, they are represented as separate rows in the fact
table.)
Even date and time are often represented using dimension tables, because this allows
additional information about dates (such as public holidays) to be encoded, allowing
queries to differentiate between sales on holidays and non-holidays.
The name “star schema” comes from the fact that when the table relationships are
visualized, the fact table is in the middle, surrounded by its dimension tables; the
connections to these tables are like the rays of a star.
A variation of this template is known as the snowflake schema, where dimensions are
further broken down into subdimensions. For example, there could be separate tables
for brands and product categories, and each row in the dim_product table could ref‐
erence the brand and category as foreign keys, rather than storing them as strings in
the dim_product table. Snowflake schemas are more normalized than star schemas,
but star schemas are often preferred because they are simpler for analysts to work
with [55].
In a typical data warehouse, tables are often very wide: fact tables often have over 100
columns, sometimes several hundred [51]. Dimension tables can also be very wide, as
they include all the metadata that may be relevant for analysis—for example, the
dim_store table may include details of which services are offered at each store,
whether it has an in-store bakery, the square footage, the date when the store was first
opened, when it was last remodeled, how far it is from the nearest highway, etc. 
Column-Oriented Storage
If you have trillions of rows and petabytes of data in your fact tables, storing and
querying them efficiently becomes a challenging problem. Dimension tables are usu‐
ally much smaller (millions of rows), so in this section we will concentrate primarily
on storage of facts.
Although fact tables are often over 100 columns wide, a typical data warehouse query
only accesses 4 or 5 of them at one time ( "SELECT *" queries are rarely needed for
analytics) [ 51]. Take the query in Example 3-1 : it accesses a large number of rows
(every occurrence of someone buying fruit or candy during the 2013 calendar year),
but it only needs to access three columns of the fact_sales table: date_key,
product_sk, and quantity. The query ignores all other columns.
Column-Oriented Storage | 95

Example 3-1. Analyzing whether people are more inclined to buy fresh fruit or candy,
depending on the day of the week
SELECT
  dim_date.weekday, dim_product.category,
  SUM(fact_sales.quantity) AS quantity_sold
FROM fact_sales
  JOIN dim_date    ON fact_sales.date_key   = dim_date.date_key
  JOIN dim_product ON fact_sales.product_sk = dim_product.product_sk
WHERE
  dim_date.year = 2013 AND
  dim_product.category IN ('Fresh fruit' , 'Candy' )
GROUP BY
  dim_date.weekday, dim_product.category;
How can we execute this query efficiently?
In most OLTP databases, storage is laid out in a row-oriented fashion: all the values
from one row of a table are stored next to each other. Document databases are simi‐
lar: an entire document is typically stored as one contiguous sequence of bytes. You
can see this in the CSV example of Figure 3-1.
In order to process a query like Example 3-1 , you may have indexes on
fact_sales.date_key and/or fact_sales.product_sk that tell the storage engine
where to find all the sales for a particular date or for a particular product. But then, a
row-oriented storage engine still needs to load all of those rows (each consisting of
over 100 attributes) from disk into memory, parse them, and filter out those that
don’t meet the required conditions. That can take a long time.
The idea behind column-oriented storage is simple: don’t store all the values from one
row together, but store all the values from each column together instead. If each col‐
umn is stored in a separate file, a query only needs to read and parse those columns
that are used in that query, which can save a lot of work. This principle is illustrated
in Figure 3-10. 
Column storage is easiest to understand in a relational data model,
but it applies equally to nonrelational data. For example, Parquet
[57] is a columnar storage format that supports a document data
model, based on Google’s Dremel [ 54].
96 | Chapter 3: Storage and Retrieval