Figure 3-10. Storing relational data by column, rather than by row.
The column-oriented storage layout relies on each column file containing the rows in
the same order. Thus, if you need to reassemble an entire row, you can take the 23rd
entry from each of the individual column files and put them together to form the
23rd row of the table.
Column Compression
Besides only loading those columns from disk that are required for a query, we can
further reduce the demands on disk throughput by compressing data. Fortunately,
column-oriented storage often lends itself very well to compression.
Take a look at the sequences of values for each column in Figure 3-10: they often look
quite repetitive, which is a good sign for compression. Depending on the data in the
column, different compression techniques can be used. One technique that is particu‐
larly effective in data warehouses is bitmap encoding, illustrated in Figure 3-11.
Column-Oriented Storage | 97

Figure 3-11. Compressed, bitmap-indexed storage of a single column.
Often, the number of distinct values in a column is small compared to the number of
rows (for example, a retailer may have billions of sales transactions, but only 100,000
distinct products). We can now take a column with n distinct values and turn it into
n separate bitmaps: one bitmap for each distinct value, with one bit for each row. The
bit is 1 if the row has that value, and 0 if not.
If n is very small (for example, a country column may have approximately 200 dis‐
tinct values), those bitmaps can be stored with one bit per row. But if n is bigger,
there will be a lot of zeros in most of the bitmaps (we say that they are sparse). In that
case, the bitmaps can additionally be run-length encoded, as shown at the bottom of
Figure 3-11. This can make the encoding of a column remarkably compact.
Bitmap indexes such as these are very well suited for the kinds of queries that are
common in a data warehouse. For example:
WHERE product_sk IN (30, 68, 69):
Load the three bitmaps for product_sk = 30, product_sk = 68, and product_sk
= 69, and calculate the bitwise OR of the three bitmaps, which can be done very
efficiently.
98 | Chapter 3: Storage and Retrieval

WHERE product_sk = 31 AND store_sk = 3:
Load the bitmaps for product_sk = 31 and store_sk = 3, and calculate the bit‐
wise AND. This works because the columns contain the rows in the same order,
so the kth bit in one column’s bitmap corresponds to the same row as the kth bit
in another column’s bitmap.
There are also various other compression schemes for different kinds of data, but we
won’t go into them in detail—see [ 58] for an overview.
Column-oriented storage and column families
Cassandra and HBase have a concept of column families , which
they inherited from Bigtable [ 9]. However, it is very misleading to
call them column-oriented: within each column family, they store
all columns from a row together, along with a row key, and they do
not use column compression. Thus, the Bigtable model is still
mostly row-oriented.
Memory bandwidth and vectorized processing
For data warehouse queries that need to scan over millions of rows, a big bottleneck
is the bandwidth for getting data from disk into memory. However, that is not the
only bottleneck. Developers of analytical databases also worry about efficiently using
the bandwidth from main memory into the CPU cache, avoiding branch mispredic‐
tions and bubbles in the CPU instruction processing pipeline, and making use of
single-instruction-multi-data (SIMD) instructions in modern CPUs [59, 60].
Besides reducing the volume of data that needs to be loaded from disk, column-
oriented storage layouts are also good for making efficient use of CPU cycles. For
example, the query engine can take a chunk of compressed column data that fits
comfortably in the CPU’s L1 cache and iterate through it in a tight loop (that is, with
no function calls). A CPU can execute such a loop much faster than code that
requires a lot of function calls and conditions for each record that is processed. Col‐
umn compression allows more rows from a column to fit in the same amount of L1
cache. Operators, such as the bitwise AND and OR described previously, can be
designed to operate on such chunks of compressed column data directly. This techni‐
que is known as vectorized processing [58, 49]. 
Sort Order in Column Storage
In a column store, it doesn’t necessarily matter in which order the rows are stored.
It’s easiest to store them in the order in which they were inserted, since then inserting
a new row just means appending to each of the column files. However, we can choose
to impose an order, like we did with SSTables previously, and use that as an indexing
mechanism.
Column-Oriented Storage | 99

Note that it wouldn’t make sense to sort each column independently, because then
we would no longer know which items in the columns belong to the same row. We
can only reconstruct a row because we know that the kth item in one column belongs
to the same row as the kth item in another column.
Rather, the data needs to be sorted an entire row at a time, even though it is stored by
column. The administrator of the database can choose the columns by which the
table should be sorted, using their knowledge of common queries. For example, if
queries often target date ranges, such as the last month, it might make sense to make
date_key the first sort key. Then the query optimizer can scan only the rows from the
last month, which will be much faster than scanning all rows.
A second column can determine the sort order of any rows that have the same value
in the first column. For example, if date_key is the first sort key in Figure 3-10 , it
might make sense for product_sk to be the second sort key so that all sales for the
same product on the same day are grouped together in storage. That will help queries
that need to group or filter sales by product within a certain date range.
Another advantage of sorted order is that it can help with compression of columns. If
the primary sort column does not have many distinct values, then after sorting, it will
have long sequences where the same value is repeated many times in a row. A simple
run-length encoding, like we used for the bitmaps in Figure 3-11 , could compress
that column down to a few kilobytes—even if the table has billions of rows.
That compression effect is strongest on the first sort key. The second and third sort
keys will be more jumbled up, and thus not have such long runs of repeated values.
Columns further down the sorting priority appear in essentially random order, so
they probably won’t compress as well. But having the first few columns sorted is still
a win overall.
Several different sort orders
A clever extension of this idea was introduced in C-Store and adopted in the com‐
mercial data warehouse Vertica [ 61, 62]. Different queries benefit from different sort
orders, so why not store the same data sorted in several different ways? Data needs to
be replicated to multiple machines anyway, so that you don’t lose data if one machine
fails. You might as well store that redundant data sorted in different ways so that
when you’re processing a query, you can use the version that best fits the query
pattern.
Having multiple sort orders in a column-oriented store is a bit similar to having mul‐
tiple secondary indexes in a row-oriented store. But the big difference is that the row-
oriented store keeps every row in one place (in the heap file or a clustered index), and
secondary indexes just contain pointers to the matching rows. In a column store,
there normally aren’t any pointers to data elsewhere, only columns containing values. 
100 | Chapter 3: Storage and Retrieval

Writing to Column-Oriented Storage
These optimizations make sense in data warehouses, because most of the load con‐
sists of large read-only queries run by analysts. Column-oriented storage, compres‐
sion, and sorting all help to make those read queries faster. However, they have the
downside of making writes more difficult.
An update-in-place approach, like B-trees use, is not possible with compressed col‐
umns. If you wanted to insert a row in the middle of a sorted table, you would most
likely have to rewrite all the column files. As rows are identified by their position
within a column, the insertion has to update all columns consistently.
Fortunately, we have already seen a good solution earlier in this chapter: LSM-trees.
All writes first go to an in-memory store, where they are added to a sorted structure
and prepared for writing to disk. It doesn’t matter whether the in-memory store is
row-oriented or column-oriented. When enough writes have accumulated, they are
merged with the column files on disk and written to new files in bulk. This is essen‐
tially what Vertica does [62].
Queries need to examine both the column data on disk and the recent writes in mem‐
ory, and combine the two. However, the query optimizer hides this distinction from
the user. From an analyst’s point of view, data that has been modified with inserts,
updates, or deletes is immediately reflected in subsequent queries. 
Aggregation: Data Cubes and Materialized Views
Not every data warehouse is necessarily a column store: traditional row-oriented
databases and a few other architectures are also used. However, columnar storage can
be significantly faster for ad hoc analytical queries, so it is rapidly gaining popularity
[51, 63].
Another aspect of data warehouses that is worth mentioning briefly is materialized
aggregates. As discussed earlier, data warehouse queries often involve an aggregate
function, such as COUNT, SUM, AVG, MIN, or MAX in SQL. If the same aggregates are used
by many different queries, it can be wasteful to crunch through the raw data every
time. Why not cache some of the counts or sums that queries use most often?
One way of creating such a cache is a materialized view. In a relational data model, it
is often defined like a standard (virtual) view: a table-like object whose contents are
the results of some query. The difference is that a materialized view is an actual copy
of the query results, written to disk, whereas a virtual view is just a shortcut for writ‐
ing queries. When you read from a virtual view, the SQL engine expands it into the
view’s underlying query on the fly and then processes the expanded query.
When the underlying data changes, a materialized view needs to be updated, because
it is a denormalized copy of the data. The database can do that automatically, but
Column-Oriented Storage | 101

such updates make writes more expensive, which is why materialized views are not
often used in OLTP databases. In read-heavy data warehouses they can make more
sense (whether or not they actually improve read performance depends on the indi‐
vidual case).
A common special case of a materialized view is known as a data cube or OLAP cube
[64]. It is a grid of aggregates grouped by different dimensions. Figure 3-12 shows an
example.
Figure 3-12. Two dimensions of a data cube, aggregating data by summing.
Imagine for now that each fact has foreign keys to only two dimension tables—in
Figure 3-12, these are date and product. You can now draw a two-dimensional table,
with dates along one axis and products along the other. Each cell contains the aggre‐
gate (e.g., SUM) of an attribute (e.g., net_price) of all facts with that date-product
combination. Then you can apply the same aggregate along each row or column and
get a summary that has been reduced by one dimension (the sales by product regard‐
less of date, or the sales by date regardless of product).
In general, facts often have more than two dimensions. In Figure 3-9 there are five
dimensions: date, product, store, promotion, and customer. It’s a lot harder to imag‐
ine what a five-dimensional hypercube would look like, but the principle remains the
same: each cell contains the sales for a particular date-product-store-promotion-
customer combination. These values can then repeatedly be summarized along each
of the dimensions.
The advantage of a materialized data cube is that certain queries become very fast
because they have effectively been precomputed. For example, if you want to know
102 | Chapter 3: Storage and Retrieval

the total sales per store yesterday, you just need to look at the totals along the appro‐
priate dimension—no need to scan millions of rows.
The disadvantage is that a data cube doesn’t have the same flexibility as querying the
raw data. For example, there is no way of calculating which proportion of sales comes
from items that cost more than $100, because the price isn’t one of the dimensions.
Most data warehouses therefore try to keep as much raw data as possible, and use
aggregates such as data cubes only as a performance boost for certain queries.
Summary
In this chapter we tried to get to the bottom of how databases handle storage and
retrieval. What happens when you store data in a database, and what does the data‐
base do when you query for the data again later?
On a high level, we saw that storage engines fall into two broad categories: those opti‐
mized for transaction processing (OLTP), and those optimized for analytics (OLAP).
There are big differences between the access patterns in those use cases:
• OLTP systems are typically user-facing, which means that they may see a huge
volume of requests. In order to handle the load, applications usually only touch a
small number of records in each query. The application requests records using
some kind of key, and the storage engine uses an index to find the data for the
requested key. Disk seek time is often the bottleneck here.
• Data warehouses and similar analytic systems are less well known, because they
are primarily used by business analysts, not by end users. They handle a much
lower volume of queries than OLTP systems, but each query is typically very
demanding, requiring many millions of records to be scanned in a short time.
Disk bandwidth (not seek time) is often the bottleneck here, and column-
oriented storage is an increasingly popular solution for this kind of workload.
On the OLTP side, we saw storage engines from two main schools of thought:
• The log-structured school, which only permits appending to files and deleting
obsolete files, but never updates a file that has been written. Bitcask, SSTables,
LSM-trees, LevelDB, Cassandra, HBase, Lucene, and others belong to this group.
• The update-in-place school, which treats the disk as a set of fixed-size pages that
can be overwritten. B-trees are the biggest example of this philosophy, being used
in all major relational databases and also many nonrelational ones.
Log-structured storage engines are a comparatively recent development. Their key
idea is that they systematically turn random-access writes into sequential writes on
disk, which enables higher write throughput due to the performance characteristics
of hard drives and SSDs.
Summary | 103

Finishing off the OLTP side, we did a brief tour through some more complicated
indexing structures, and databases that are optimized for keeping all data in memory.
We then took a detour from the internals of storage engines to look at the high-level
architecture of a typical data warehouse. This background illustrated why analytic
workloads are so different from OLTP: when your queries require sequentially scan‐
ning across a large number of rows, indexes are much less relevant. Instead it
becomes important to encode data very compactly, to minimize the amount of data
that the query needs to read from disk. We discussed how column-oriented storage
helps achieve this goal.
As an application developer, if you’re armed with this knowledge about the internals
of storage engines, you are in a much better position to know which tool is best suited
for your particular application. If you need to adjust a database’s tuning parameters,
this understanding allows you to imagine what effect a higher or a lower value may
have.
Although this chapter couldn’t make you an expert in tuning any one particular stor‐
age engine, it has hopefully equipped you with enough vocabulary and ideas that you
can make sense of the documentation for the database of your choice. 
References
[1] Alfred V. Aho, John E. Hopcroft, and Jeffrey D. Ullman: Data Structures and
Algorithms. Addison-Wesley, 1983. ISBN: 978-0-201-00023-8
[2] Thomas H. Cormen, Charles E. Leiserson, Ronald L. Rivest, and Clifford Stein:
Introduction to Algorithms, 3rd edition. MIT Press, 2009. ISBN: 978-0-262-53305-8
[3] Justin Sheehy and David Smith: “ Bitcask: A Log-Structured Hash Table for Fast
Key/Value Data,” Basho Technologies, April 2010.
[4] Yinan Li, Bingsheng He, Robin Jun Yang, et al.: “ Tree Indexing on Solid State
Drives,” Proceedings of the VLDB Endowment, volume 3, number 1, pages 1195–1206,
September 2010.
[5] Goetz Graefe: “ Modern B-Tree Techniques ,” Foundations and Trends in Data‐
bases, volume 3, number 4, pages 203–402, August 2011. doi:10.1561/1900000028
[6] Jeffrey Dean and Sanjay Ghemawat: “ LevelDB Implementation Notes ,” lev‐
eldb.googlecode.com.
[7] Dhruba Borthakur: “ The History of RocksDB ,” rocksdb.blogspot.com, November
24, 2013.
[8] Matteo Bertozzi: “ Apache HBase I/O – HFile ,” blog.cloudera.com, June, 29 2012.
104 | Chapter 3: Storage and Retrieval

[9] Fay Chang, Jeffrey Dean, Sanjay Ghemawat, et al.: “ Bigtable: A Distributed Stor‐
age System for Structured Data ,” at 7th USENIX Symposium on Operating System
Design and Implementation (OSDI), November 2006.
[10] Patrick O’Neil, Edward Cheng, Dieter Gawlick, and Elizabeth O’Neil: “ The Log-
Structured Merge-Tree (LSM-Tree) ,” Acta Informatica, volume 33, number 4, pages
351–385, June 1996. doi:10.1007/s002360050048
[11] Mendel Rosenblum and John K. Ousterhout: “ The Design and Implementation
of a Log-Structured File System ,” ACM Transactions on Computer Systems , volume
10, number 1, pages 26–52, February 1992. doi:10.1145/146941.146943
[12] Adrien Grand: “ What Is in a Lucene Index?,” at Lucene/Solr Revolution, Novem‐
ber 14, 2013.
[13] Deepak Kandepet: “ Hacking Lucene—The Index Format ,” hackerlabs.org, Octo‐
ber 1, 2011.
[14] Michael McCandless: “ Visualizing Lucene’s Segment Merges ,” blog.mikemccand‐
less.com, February 11, 2011.
[15] Burton H. Bloom: “ Space/Time Trade-offs in Hash Coding with Allowable
Errors,” Communications of the ACM , volume 13, number 7, pages 422–426, July
1970. doi:10.1145/362686.362692
[16] “ Operating Cassandra: Compaction ,” Apache Cassandra Documentation v4.0,
2016.
[17] Rudolf Bayer and Edward M. McCreight: “ Organization and Maintenance of
Large Ordered Indices ,” Boeing Scientific Research Laboratories, Mathematical and
Information Sciences Laboratory, report no. 20, July 1970.
[18] Douglas Comer: “ The Ubiquitous B-Tree,” ACM Computing Surveys, volume 11,
number 2, pages 121–137, June 1979. doi:10.1145/356770.356776
[19] Emmanuel Goossaert: “ Coding for SSDs,” codecapsule.com, February 12, 2014.
[20] C. Mohan and Frank Levine: “ ARIES/IM: An Efficient and High Concurrency
Index Management Method Using Write-Ahead Logging ,” at ACM International
Conference on Management of Data  (SIGMOD), June 1992. doi:
10.1145/130283.130338
[21] Howard Chu: “ LDAP at Lightning Speed,” at Build Stuff ’14 , November 2014.
[22] Bradley C. Kuszmaul: “ A Comparison of Fractal Trees to Log-Structured Merge
(LSM) Trees,” tokutek.com, April 22, 2014.
[23] Manos Athanassoulis, Michael S. Kester, Lukas M. Maas, et al.: “ Designing
Access Methods: The RUM Conjecture ,” at 19th International Conference on Extend‐
ing Database Technology (EDBT), March 2016. doi:10.5441/002/edbt.2016.42
Summary | 105

[24] Peter Zaitsev: “ Innodb Double Write,” percona.com, August 4, 2006.
[25] Tomas Vondra: “ On the Impact of Full-Page Writes ,” blog.2ndquadrant.com,
November 23, 2016.
[26] Mark Callaghan: “ The Advantages of an LSM vs a B-Tree ,” smalldatum.blog‐
spot.co.uk, January 19, 2016.
[27] Mark Callaghan: “ Choosing Between Efficiency and Performance with
RocksDB,” at Code Mesh, November 4, 2016.
[28] Michi Mutsuzaki: “ MySQL vs. LevelDB,” github.com, August 2011.
[29] Benjamin Coverston, Jonathan Ellis, et al.: “ CASSANDRA-1608: Redesigned
Compaction, issues.apache.org, July 2011.
[30] Igor Canadi, Siying Dong, and Mark Callaghan: “ RocksDB Tuning Guide ,” git‐
hub.com, 2016.
[31] MySQL 5.7 Reference Manual. Oracle, 2014.
[32] Books Online for SQL Server 2012. Microsoft, 2012.
[33] Joe Webb: “ Using Covering Indexes to Improve Query Performance ,” simple-
talk.com, 29 September 2008.
[34] Frank Ramsak, Volker Markl, Robert Fenk, et al.: “ Integrating the UB-Tree into
a Database System Kernel ,” at 26th International Conference on Very Large Data
Bases (VLDB), September 2000.
[35] The PostGIS Development Group: “ PostGIS 2.1.2dev Manual,” postgis.net, 2014.
[36] Robert Escriva, Bernard Wong, and Emin Gün Sirer: “ HyperDex: A Distributed,
Searchable Key-Value Store ,” at ACM SIGCOMM Conference , August 2012. doi:
10.1145/2377677.2377681
[37] Michael McCandless: “ Lucene’s FuzzyQuery Is 100 Times Faster in 4.0 ,”
blog.mikemccandless.com, March 24, 2011.
[38] Steffen Heinz, Justin Zobel, and Hugh E. Williams: “ Burst Tries: A Fast, Efficient
Data Structure for String Keys ,” ACM Transactions on Information Systems , volume
20, number 2, pages 192–223, April 2002. doi:10.1145/506309.506312
[39] Klaus U. Schulz and Stoyan Mihov: “ Fast String Correction with Levenshtein
Automata,” International Journal on Document Analysis and Recognition , volume 5,
number 1, pages 67–85, November 2002. doi:10.1007/s10032-002-0082-8
[40] Christopher D. Manning, Prabhakar Raghavan, and Hinrich Schütze: Introduc‐
tion to Information Retrieval . Cambridge University Press, 2008. ISBN:
978-0-521-86571-5, available online at nlp.stanford.edu/IR-book
106 | Chapter 3: Storage and Retrieval

[41] Michael Stonebraker, Samuel Madden, Daniel J. Abadi, et al.: “ The End of an
Architectural Era (It’s Time for a Complete Rewrite) ,” at 33rd International Confer‐
ence on Very Large Data Bases (VLDB), September 2007.
[42] “ VoltDB Technical Overview White Paper,” VoltDB, 2014.
[43] Stephen M. Rumble, Ankita Kejriwal, and John K. Ousterhout: “ Log-Structured
Memory for DRAM-Based Storage ,” at 12th USENIX Conference on File and Storage
Technologies (FAST), February 2014.
[44] Stavros Harizopoulos, Daniel J. Abadi, Samuel Madden, and Michael Stone‐
braker: “ OLTP Through the Looking Glass, and What We Found There ,” at ACM
International Conference on Management of Data  (SIGMOD), June 2008. doi:
10.1145/1376616.1376713
[45] Justin DeBrabant, Andrew Pavlo, Stephen Tu, et al.: “ Anti-Caching: A New
Approach to Database Management System Architecture ,” Proceedings of the VLDB
Endowment, volume 6, number 14, pages 1942–1953, September 2013.
[46] Joy Arulraj, Andrew Pavlo, and Subramanya R. Dulloor: “ Let’s Talk About Stor‐
age & Recovery Methods for Non-Volatile Memory Database Systems ,” at ACM
International Conference on Management of Data  (SIGMOD), June 2015. doi:
10.1145/2723372.2749441
[47] Edgar F. Codd, S. B. Codd, and C. T. Salley: “ Providing OLAP to User-Analysts:
An IT Mandate,” E. F. Codd Associates, 1993.
[48] Surajit Chaudhuri and Umeshwar Dayal: “ An Overview of Data Warehousing
and OLAP Technology,” ACM SIGMOD Record, volume 26, number 1, pages 65–74,
March 1997. doi:10.1145/248603.248616
[49] Per-Åke Larson, Cipri Clinciu, Campbell Fraser, et al.: “ Enhancements to SQL
Server Column Stores ,” at ACM International Conference on Management of Data
(SIGMOD), June 2013.
[50] Franz Färber, Norman May, Wolfgang Lehner, et al.: “ The SAP HANA Database
– An Architecture Overview ,” IEEE Data Engineering Bulletin, volume 35, number 1,
pages 28–33, March 2012.
[51] Michael Stonebraker: “ The Traditional RDBMS Wisdom Is (Almost Certainly)
All Wrong,” presentation at EPFL, May 2013.
[52] Daniel J. Abadi: “ Classifying the SQL-on-Hadoop Solutions,” hadapt.com, Octo‐
ber 2, 2013.
[53] Marcel Kornacker, Alexander Behm, Victor Bittorf, et al.: “ Impala: A Modern,
Open-Source SQL Engine for Hadoop ,” at 7th Biennial Conference on Innovative
Data Systems Research (CIDR), January 2015.
Summary | 107

[54] Sergey Melnik, Andrey Gubarev, Jing Jing Long, et al.: “ Dremel: Interactive
Analysis of Web-Scale Datasets,” at 36th International Conference on Very Large Data
Bases (VLDB), pages 330–339, September 2010.
[55] Ralph Kimball and Margy Ross: The Data Warehouse Toolkit: The Definitive
Guide to Dimensional Modeling , 3rd edition. John Wiley & Sons, July 2013. ISBN:
978-1-118-53080-1
[56] Derrick Harris: “ Why Apple, eBay, and Walmart Have Some of the Biggest Data
Warehouses You’ve Ever Seen ,” gigaom.com, March 27, 2013.
[57] Julien Le Dem: “ Dremel Made Simple with Parquet ,” blog.twitter.com, Septem‐
ber 11, 2013.
[58] Daniel J. Abadi, Peter Boncz, Stavros Harizopoulos, et al.: “ The Design and
Implementation of Modern Column-Oriented Database Systems ,” Foundations and
Trends in Databases , volume 5, number 3, pages 197–280, December 2013. doi:
10.1561/1900000024
[59] Peter Boncz, Marcin Zukowski, and Niels Nes: “ MonetDB/X100: Hyper-
Pipelining Query Execution,” at 2nd Biennial Conference on Innovative Data Systems
Research (CIDR), January 2005.
[60] Jingren Zhou and Kenneth A. Ross: “ Implementing Database Operations Using
SIMD Instructions,” at ACM International Conference on Management of Data  (SIG‐
MOD), pages 145–156, June 2002. doi:10.1145/564691.564709
[61] Michael Stonebraker, Daniel J. Abadi, Adam Batkin, et al.: “ C-Store: A Column-
oriented DBMS,” at 31st International Conference on Very Large Data Bases  (VLDB),
pages 553–564, September 2005.
[62] Andrew Lamb, Matt Fuller, Ramakrishna Varadarajan, et al.: “ The Vertica Ana‐
lytic Database: C-Store 7 Years Later ,” Proceedings of the VLDB Endowment , volume
5, number 12, pages 1790–1801, August 2012.
[63] Julien Le Dem and Nong Li: “ Efficient Data Storage for Analytics with Apache
Parquet 2.0,” at Hadoop Summit, San Jose, June 2014.
[64] Jim Gray, Surajit Chaudhuri, Adam Bosworth, et al.: “ Data Cube: A Relational
Aggregation Operator Generalizing Group-By, Cross-Tab, and Sub-Totals ,” Data
Mining and Knowledge Discovery , volume 1, number 1, pages 29–53, March 2007.
doi:10.1023/A:1009726021843
108 | Chapter 3: Storage and Retrieval

CHAPTER 4
Encoding and Evolution
Everything changes and nothing stands still.
—Heraclitus of Ephesus, as quoted by Plato in Cratylus (360 BCE)
Applications inevitably change over time. Features are added or modified as new
products are launched, user requirements become better understood, or business cir‐
cumstances change. In Chapter 1 we introduced the idea of evolvability: we should
aim to build systems that make it easy to adapt to change (see “Evolvability: Making
Change Easy” on page 21 ).
In most cases, a change to an application’s features also requires a change to data that
it stores: perhaps a new field or record type needs to be captured, or perhaps existing
data needs to be presented in a new way.
The data models we discussed in Chapter 2 have different ways of coping with such
change. Relational databases generally assume that all data in the database conforms
to one schema: although that schema can be changed (through schema migrations;
i.e., ALTER statements), there is exactly one schema in force at any one point in time.
By contrast, schema-on-read (“schemaless”) databases don’t enforce a schema, so the
database can contain a mixture of older and newer data formats written at different
times (see “Schema flexibility in the document model” on page 39 ).
When a data format or schema changes, a corresponding change to application code
often needs to happen (for example, you add a new field to a record, and the applica‐
tion code starts reading and writing that field). However, in a large application, code
changes often cannot happen instantaneously:
111

• With server-side applications you may want to perform a rolling upgrade  (also
known as a staged rollout), deploying the new version to a few nodes at a time,
checking whether the new version is running smoothly, and gradually working
your way through all the nodes. This allows new versions to be deployed without
service downtime, and thus encourages more frequent releases and better evolva‐
bility.
• With client-side applications you’re at the mercy of the user, who may not install
the update for some time.
This means that old and new versions of the code, and old and new data formats,
may potentially all coexist in the system at the same time. In order for the system to
continue running smoothly, we need to maintain compatibility in both directions:
Backward compatibility
Newer code can read data that was written by older code.
Forward compatibility
Older code can read data that was written by newer code.
Backward compatibility is normally not hard to achieve: as author of the newer code,
you know the format of data written by older code, and so you can explicitly handle it
(if necessary by simply keeping the old code to read the old data). Forward compati‐
bility can be trickier, because it requires older code to ignore additions made by a
newer version of the code.
In this chapter we will look at several formats for encoding data, including JSON,
XML, Protocol Buffers, Thrift, and Avro. In particular, we will look at how they han‐
dle schema changes and how they support systems where old and new data and code
need to coexist. We will then discuss how those formats are used for data storage and
for communication: in web services, Representational State Transfer (REST), and
remote procedure calls (RPC), as well as message-passing systems such as actors and
message queues.
Formats for Encoding Data
Programs usually work with data in (at least) two different representations:
1. In memory, data is kept in objects, structs, lists, arrays, hash tables, trees, and so
on. These data structures are optimized for efficient access and manipulation by
the CPU (typically using pointers).
2. When you want to write data to a file or send it over the network, you have to
encode it as some kind of self-contained sequence of bytes (for example, a JSON
document). Since a pointer wouldn’t make sense to any other process, this
112 | Chapter 4: Encoding and Evolution

i. With the exception of some special cases, such as certain memory-mapped files or when operating directly
on compressed data (as described in “Column Compression” on page 97 ).
ii. Note that encoding has nothing to do with encryption. We don’t discuss encryption in this book.
sequence-of-bytes representation looks quite different from the data structures
that are normally used in memory.i
Thus, we need some kind of translation between the two representations. The trans‐
lation from the in-memory representation to a byte sequence is called encoding (also
known as serialization or marshalling), and the reverse is called decoding (parsing,
deserialization, unmarshalling).ii
Terminology clash
Serialization is unfortunately also used in the context of transac‐
tions (see Chapter 7 ), with a completely different meaning. To
avoid overloading the word we’ll stick with encoding in this book,
even though serialization is perhaps a more common term.
As this is such a common problem, there are a myriad different libraries and encod‐
ing formats to choose from. Let’s do a brief overview.
Language-Specific Formats
Many programming languages come with built-in support for encoding in-memory
objects into byte sequences. For example, Java has java.io.Serializable [1], Ruby
has Marshal [2], Python has pickle [3], and so on. Many third-party libraries also
exist, such as Kryo for Java [4].
These encoding libraries are very convenient, because they allow in-memory objects
to be saved and restored with minimal additional code. However, they also have a
number of deep problems:
• The encoding is often tied to a particular programming language, and reading
the data in another language is very difficult. If you store or transmit data in such
an encoding, you are committing yourself to your current programming lan‐
guage for potentially a very long time, and precluding integrating your systems
with those of other organizations (which may use different languages).
• In order to restore data in the same object types, the decoding process needs to
be able to instantiate arbitrary classes. This is frequently a source of security
problems [5]: if an attacker can get your application to decode an arbitrary byte
sequence, they can instantiate arbitrary classes, which in turn often allows them
to do terrible things such as remotely executing arbitrary code [6, 7].
Formats for Encoding Data | 113

• Versioning data is often an afterthought in these libraries: as they are intended
for quick and easy encoding of data, they often neglect the inconvenient prob‐
lems of forward and backward compatibility.
• Efficiency (CPU time taken to encode or decode, and the size of the encoded
structure) is also often an afterthought. For example, Java’s built-in serialization
is notorious for its bad performance and bloated encoding [8].
For these reasons it’s generally a bad idea to use your language’s built-in encoding for
anything other than very transient purposes.
JSON, XML, and Binary Variants
Moving to standardized encodings that can be written and read by many program‐
ming languages, JSON and XML are the obvious contenders. They are widely known,
widely supported, and almost as widely disliked. XML is often criticized for being too
verbose and unnecessarily complicated [ 9]. JSON’s popularity is mainly due to its
built-in support in web browsers (by virtue of being a subset of JavaScript) and sim‐
plicity relative to XML. CSV is another popular language-independent format, albeit
less powerful.
JSON, XML, and CSV are textual formats, and thus somewhat human-readable
(although the syntax is a popular topic of debate). Besides the superficial syntactic
issues, they also have some subtle problems:
• There is a lot of ambiguity around the encoding of numbers. In XML and CSV,
you cannot distinguish between a number and a string that happens to consist of
digits (except by referring to an external schema). JSON distinguishes strings and
numbers, but it doesn’t distinguish integers and floating-point numbers, and it
doesn’t specify a precision.
This is a problem when dealing with large numbers; for example, integers greater
than 253 cannot be exactly represented in an IEEE 754 double-precision floating-
point number, so such numbers become inaccurate when parsed in a language
that uses floating-point numbers (such as JavaScript). An example of numbers
larger than 2 53 occurs on Twitter, which uses a 64-bit number to identify each
tweet. The JSON returned by Twitter’s API includes tweet IDs twice, once as a
JSON number and once as a decimal string, to work around the fact that the
numbers are not correctly parsed by JavaScript applications [10].
• JSON and XML have good support for Unicode character strings (i.e., human-
readable text), but they don’t support binary strings (sequences of bytes without
a character encoding). Binary strings are a useful feature, so people get around
this limitation by encoding the binary data as text using Base64. The schema is
then used to indicate that the value should be interpreted as Base64-encoded.
This works, but it’s somewhat hacky and increases the data size by 33%.
114 | Chapter 4: Encoding and Evolution

• There is optional schema support for both XML [ 11] and JSON [ 12]. These
schema languages are quite powerful, and thus quite complicated to learn and
implement. Use of XML schemas is fairly widespread, but many JSON-based
tools don’t bother using schemas. Since the correct interpretation of data (such
as numbers and binary strings) depends on information in the schema, applica‐
tions that don’t use XML/JSON schemas need to potentially hardcode the appro‐
priate encoding/decoding logic instead.
• CSV does not have any schema, so it is up to the application to define the mean‐
ing of each row and column. If an application change adds a new row or column,
you have to handle that change manually. CSV is also a quite vague format (what
happens if a value contains a comma or a newline character?). Although its
escaping rules have been formally specified [ 13], not all parsers implement them
correctly.
Despite these flaws, JSON, XML, and CSV are good enough for many purposes. It’s
likely that they will remain popular, especially as data interchange formats (i.e., for
sending data from one organization to another). In these situations, as long as people
agree on what the format is, it often doesn’t matter how pretty or efficient the format
is. The difficulty of getting different organizations to agree on anything outweighs
most other concerns.
Binary encoding
For data that is used only internally within your organization, there is less pressure to
use a lowest-common-denominator encoding format. For example, you could choose
a format that is more compact or faster to parse. For a small dataset, the gains are
negligible, but once you get into the terabytes, the choice of data format can have a
big impact.
JSON is less verbose than XML, but both still use a lot of space compared to binary
formats. This observation led to the development of a profusion of binary encodings
for JSON (MessagePack, BSON, BJSON, UBJSON, BISON, and Smile, to name a few)
and for XML (WBXML and Fast Infoset, for example). These formats have been
adopted in various niches, but none of them are as widely adopted as the textual ver‐
sions of JSON and XML.
Some of these formats extend the set of datatypes (e.g., distinguishing integers and
floating-point numbers, or adding support for binary strings), but otherwise they
keep the JSON/XML data model unchanged. In particular, since they don’t prescribe
a schema, they need to include all the object field names within the encoded data.
That is, in a binary encoding of the JSON document in Example 4-1, they will need to
include the strings userName, favoriteNumber, and interests somewhere.
Formats for Encoding Data | 115

Example 4-1. Example record which we will encode in several binary formats in this
chapter
{
    "userName": "Martin",
    "favoriteNumber": 1337,
    "interests": ["daydreaming", "hacking"]
}
Let’s look at an example of MessagePack, a binary encoding for JSON. Figure 4-1
shows the byte sequence that you get if you encode the JSON document in
Example 4-1 with MessagePack [14]. The first few bytes are as follows:
1. The first byte, 0x83, indicates that what follows is an object (top four bits = 0x80)
with three fields (bottom four bits = 0x03). (In case you’re wondering what hap‐
pens if an object has more than 15 fields, so that the number of fields doesn’t fit
in four bits, it then gets a different type indicator, and the number of fields is
encoded in two or four bytes.)
2. The second byte, 0xa8, indicates that what follows is a string (top four bits =
0xa0) that is eight bytes long (bottom four bits = 0x08).
3. The next eight bytes are the field name userName in ASCII. Since the length was
indicated previously, there’s no need for any marker to tell us where the string
ends (or any escaping).
4. The next seven bytes encode the six-letter string value Martin with a prefix 0xa6,
and so on.
The binary encoding is 66 bytes long, which is only a little less than the 81 bytes taken
by the textual JSON encoding (with whitespace removed). All the binary encodings of
JSON are similar in this regard. It’s not clear whether such a small space reduction
(and perhaps a speedup in parsing) is worth the loss of human-readability.
In the following sections we will see how we can do much better, and encode the
same record in just 32 bytes.
116 | Chapter 4: Encoding and Evolution

Figure 4-1. Example record (Example 4-1) encoded using MessagePack.
Thrift and Protocol Buffers
Apache Thrift [15] and Protocol Buffers (protobuf) [16] are binary encoding libraries
that are based on the same principle. Protocol Buffers was originally developed at
Google, Thrift was originally developed at Facebook, and both were made open
source in 2007–08 [ 17].
Both Thrift and Protocol Buffers require a schema for any data that is encoded. To
encode the data in Example 4-1  in Thrift, you would describe the schema in the
Thrift interface definition language (IDL) like this:
struct Person {
  1: required string       userName,
  2: optional i64          favoriteNumber,
  3: optional list<string> interests
}
Formats for Encoding Data | 117

iii. Actually, it has three—BinaryProtocol, CompactProtocol, and DenseProtocol—although DenseProtocol
is only supported by the C++ implementation, so it doesn’t count as cross-language [ 18]. Besides those, it also
has two different JSON-based encoding formats [19]. What fun!
The equivalent schema definition for Protocol Buffers looks very similar:
message Person {
    required string user_name       = 1;
    optional int64  favorite_number = 2;
    repeated string interests       = 3;
}
Thrift and Protocol Buffers each come with a code generation tool that takes a
schema definition like the ones shown here, and produces classes that implement the
schema in various programming languages [ 18]. Your application code can call this
generated code to encode or decode records of the schema.
What does data encoded with this schema look like? Confusingly, Thrift has two dif‐
ferent binary encoding formats, iii called BinaryProtocol and CompactProtocol, respec‐
tively. Let’s look at BinaryProtocol first. Encoding Example 4-1 in that format takes
59 bytes, as shown in Figure 4-2 [19].
Figure 4-2. Example record encoded using Thrift’s BinaryProtocol.
118 | Chapter 4: Encoding and Evolution

Similarly to Figure 4-1, each field has a type annotation (to indicate whether it is a
string, integer, list, etc.) and, where required, a length indication (length of a string,
number of items in a list). The strings that appear in the data (“Martin”, “daydream‐
ing”, “hacking”) are also encoded as ASCII (or rather, UTF-8), similar to before.
The big difference compared to Figure 4-1 is that there are no field names (userName,
favoriteNumber, interests). Instead, the encoded data contains field tags, which are
numbers (1, 2, and 3). Those are the numbers that appear in the schema definition.
Field tags are like aliases for fields—they are a compact way of saying what field we’re
talking about, without having to spell out the field name.
The Thrift CompactProtocol encoding is semantically equivalent to BinaryProtocol,
but as you can see in Figure 4-3, it packs the same information into only 34 bytes. It
does this by packing the field type and tag number into a single byte, and by using
variable-length integers. Rather than using a full eight bytes for the number 1337, it is
encoded in two bytes, with the top bit of each byte used to indicate whether there are
still more bytes to come. This means numbers between –64 and 63 are encoded in
one byte, numbers between –8192 and 8191 are encoded in two bytes, etc. Bigger
numbers use more bytes.
Figure 4-3. Example record encoded using Thrift’s CompactProtocol.
Finally, Protocol Buffers (which has only one binary encoding format) encodes the
same data as shown in Figure 4-4. It does the bit packing slightly differently, but is
Formats for Encoding Data | 119

otherwise very similar to Thrift’s CompactProtocol. Protocol Buffers fits the same
record in 33 bytes.
Figure 4-4. Example record encoded using Protocol Buffers.
One detail to note: in the schemas shown earlier, each field was marked either
required or optional, but this makes no difference to how the field is encoded
(nothing in the binary data indicates whether a field was required). The difference is
simply that required enables a runtime check that fails if the field is not set, which
can be useful for catching bugs.
Field tags and schema evolution
We said previously that schemas inevitably need to change over time. We call this
schema evolution. How do Thrift and Protocol Buffers handle schema changes while
keeping backward and forward compatibility?
As you can see from the examples, an encoded record is just the concatenation of its
encoded fields. Each field is identified by its tag number (the numbers 1, 2, 3 in the
sample schemas) and annotated with a datatype (e.g., string or integer). If a field
value is not set, it is simply omitted from the encoded record. From this you can see
that field tags are critical to the meaning of the encoded data. You can change the
name of a field in the schema, since the encoded data never refers to field names, but
you cannot change a field’s tag, since that would make all existing encoded data
invalid.
120 | Chapter 4: Encoding and Evolution

You can add new fields to the schema, provided that you give each field a new tag
number. If old code (which doesn’t know about the new tag numbers you added)
tries to read data written by new code, including a new field with a tag number it
doesn’t recognize, it can simply ignore that field. The datatype annotation allows the
parser to determine how many bytes it needs to skip. This maintains forward com‐
patibility: old code can read records that were written by new code.
What about backward compatibility? As long as each field has a unique tag number,
new code can always read old data, because the tag numbers still have the same
meaning. The only detail is that if you add a new field, you cannot make it required.
If you were to add a field and make it required, that check would fail if new code read
data written by old code, because the old code will not have written the new field that
you added. Therefore, to maintain backward compatibility, every field you add after
the initial deployment of the schema must be optional or have a default value.
Removing a field is just like adding a field, with backward and forward compatibility
concerns reversed. That means you can only remove a field that is optional (a
required field can never be removed), and you can never use the same tag number
again (because you may still have data written somewhere that includes the old tag
number, and that field must be ignored by new code). 
Datatypes and schema evolution
What about changing the datatype of a field? That may be possible—check the docu‐
mentation for details—but there is a risk that values will lose precision or get trunca‐
ted. For example, say you change a 32-bit integer into a 64-bit integer. New code can
easily read data written by old code, because the parser can fill in any missing bits
with zeros. However, if old code reads data written by new code, the old code is still
using a 32-bit variable to hold the value. If the decoded 64-bit value won’t fit in 32
bits, it will be truncated.
A curious detail of Protocol Buffers is that it does not have a list or array datatype,
but instead has a repeated marker for fields (which is a third option alongside
required and optional). As you can see in Figure 4-4, the encoding of a repeated
field is just what it says on the tin: the same field tag simply appears multiple times in
the record. This has the nice effect that it’s okay to change an optional (single-
valued) field into a repeated (multi-valued) field. New code reading old data sees a
list with zero or one elements (depending on whether the field was present); old code
reading new data sees only the last element of the list.
Thrift has a dedicated list datatype, which is parameterized with the datatype of the
list elements. This does not allow the same evolution from single-valued to multi-
valued as Protocol Buffers does, but it has the advantage of supporting nested lists. 
Formats for Encoding Data | 121

Avro
Apache Avro [ 20] is another binary encoding format that is interestingly different
from Protocol Buffers and Thrift. It was started in 2009 as a subproject of Hadoop, as
a result of Thrift not being a good fit for Hadoop’s use cases [ 21].
Avro also uses a schema to specify the structure of the data being encoded. It has two
schema languages: one (Avro IDL) intended for human editing, and one (based on
JSON) that is more easily machine-readable.
Our example schema, written in Avro IDL, might look like this:
record Person {
    string               userName;
    union { null, long } favoriteNumber = null;
    array<string>        interests;
}
The equivalent JSON representation of that schema is as follows:
{
    "type": "record",
    "name": "Person",
    "fields": [
        {"name": "userName",       "type": "string"},
        {"name": "favoriteNumber", "type": ["null", "long"], "default": null},
        {"name": "interests",      "type": {"type": "array", "items": "string"}}
    ]
}
First of all, notice that there are no tag numbers in the schema. If we encode our
example record (Example 4-1) using this schema, the Avro binary encoding is just 32
bytes long—the most compact of all the encodings we have seen. The breakdown of
the encoded byte sequence is shown in Figure 4-5.
If you examine the byte sequence, you can see that there is nothing to identify fields
or their datatypes. The encoding simply consists of values concatenated together. A
string is just a length prefix followed by UTF-8 bytes, but there’s nothing in the enco‐
ded data that tells you that it is a string. It could just as well be an integer, or some‐
thing else entirely. An integer is encoded using a variable-length encoding (the same
as Thrift’s CompactProtocol).
122 | Chapter 4: Encoding and Evolution

Figure 4-5. Example record encoded using Avro.
To parse the binary data, you go through the fields in the order that they appear in
the schema and use the schema to tell you the datatype of each field. This means that
the binary data can only be decoded correctly if the code reading the data is using the
exact same schema  as the code that wrote the data. Any mismatch in the schema
between the reader and the writer would mean incorrectly decoded data.
So, how does Avro support schema evolution?
The writer’s schema and the reader’s schema
With Avro, when an application wants to encode some data (to write it to a file or
database, to send it over the network, etc.), it encodes the data using whatever version
of the schema it knows about—for example, that schema may be compiled into the
application. This is known as the writer’s schema .
When an application wants to decode some data (read it from a file or database,
receive it from the network, etc.), it is expecting the data to be in some schema, which
is known as the reader’s schema . That is the schema the application code is relying on
—code may have been generated from that schema during the application’s build
process.
The key idea with Avro is that the writer’s schema and the reader’s schema don’t have
to be the same —they only need to be compatible. When data is decoded (read), the
Formats for Encoding Data | 123

Avro library resolves the differences by looking at the writer’s schema and the
reader’s schema side by side and translating the data from the writer’s schema into
the reader’s schema. The Avro specification [ 20] defines exactly how this resolution
works, and it is illustrated in Figure 4-6.
For example, it’s no problem if the writer’s schema and the reader’s schema have
their fields in a different order, because the schema resolution matches up the fields
by field name. If the code reading the data encounters a field that appears in the
writer’s schema but not in the reader’s schema, it is ignored. If the code reading the
data expects some field, but the writer’s schema does not contain a field of that name,
it is filled in with a default value declared in the reader’s schema.
Figure 4-6. An Avro reader resolves differences between the writer’s schema and the
reader’s schema.
Schema evolution rules
With Avro, forward compatibility means that you can have a new version of the
schema as writer and an old version of the schema as reader. Conversely, backward
compatibility means that you can have a new version of the schema as reader and an
old version as writer.
To maintain compatibility, you may only add or remove a field that has a default
value. (The field favoriteNumber in our Avro schema has a default value of null.)
For example, say you add a field with a default value, so this new field exists in the
new schema but not the old one. When a reader using the new schema reads a record
written with the old schema, the default value is filled in for the missing field.
If you were to add a field that has no default value, new readers wouldn’t be able to
read data written by old writers, so you would break backward compatibility. If you
were to remove a field that has no default value, old readers wouldn’t be able to read
data written by new writers, so you would break forward compatibility.
124 | Chapter 4: Encoding and Evolution

iv. To be precise, the default value must be of the type of the first branch of the union, although this is a
specific limitation of Avro, not a general feature of union types.
In some programming languages, null is an acceptable default for any variable, but
this is not the case in Avro: if you want to allow a field to be null, you have to use a
union type . For example, union { null, long, string } field;  indicates that
field can be a number, or a string, or null. You can only use null as a default value if
it is one of the branches of the union.iv This is a little more verbose than having every‐
thing nullable by default, but it helps prevent bugs by being explicit about what can
and cannot be null [22].
Consequently, Avro doesn’t have optional and required markers in the same way as
Protocol Buffers and Thrift do (it has union types and default values instead).
Changing the datatype of a field is possible, provided that Avro can convert the type.
Changing the name of a field is possible but a little tricky: the reader’s schema can
contain aliases for field names, so it can match an old writer’s schema field names
against the aliases. This means that changing a field name is backward compatible but
not forward compatible. Similarly, adding a branch to a union type is backward com‐
patible but not forward compatible.
But what is the writer’s schema?
There is an important question that we’ve glossed over so far: how does the reader
know the writer’s schema with which a particular piece of data was encoded? We
can’t just include the entire schema with every record, because the schema would
likely be much bigger than the encoded data, making all the space savings from the
binary encoding futile.
The answer depends on the context in which Avro is being used. To give a few exam‐
ples:
Large file with lots of records
A common use for Avro—especially in the context of Hadoop—is for storing a
large file containing millions of records, all encoded with the same schema. (We
will discuss this kind of situation in Chapter 10.) In this case, the writer of that
file can just include the writer’s schema once at the beginning of the file. Avro
specifies a file format (object container files) to do this.
Database with individually written records
In a database, different records may be written at different points in time using
different writer’s schemas—you cannot assume that all the records will have the
same schema. The simplest solution is to include a version number at the begin‐
ning of every encoded record, and to keep a list of schema versions in your data‐
Formats for Encoding Data | 125

base. A reader can fetch a record, extract the version number, and then fetch the
writer’s schema for that version number from the database. Using that writer’s
schema, it can decode the rest of the record. (Espresso [ 23] works this way, for
example.)
Sending records over a network connection
When two processes are communicating over a bidirectional network connec‐
tion, they can negotiate the schema version on connection setup and then use
that schema for the lifetime of the connection. The Avro RPC protocol (see
“Dataflow Through Services: REST and RPC” on page 131 ) works like this.
A database of schema versions is a useful thing to have in any case, since it acts as
documentation and gives you a chance to check schema compatibility [ 24]. As the
version number, you could use a simple incrementing integer, or you could use a
hash of the schema.
Dynamically generated schemas
One advantage of Avro’s approach, compared to Protocol Buffers and Thrift, is that
the schema doesn’t contain any tag numbers. But why is this important? What’s the
problem with keeping a couple of numbers in the schema?
The difference is that Avro is friendlier to dynamically generated schemas. For exam‐
ple, say you have a relational database whose contents you want to dump to a file, and
you want to use a binary format to avoid the aforementioned problems with textual
formats (JSON, CSV, SQL). If you use Avro, you can fairly easily generate an Avro
schema (in the JSON representation we saw earlier) from the relational schema and
encode the database contents using that schema, dumping it all to an Avro object
container file [ 25]. You generate a record schema for each database table, and each
column becomes a field in that record. The column name in the database maps to the
field name in Avro.
Now, if the database schema changes (for example, a table has one column added and
one column removed), you can just generate a new Avro schema from the updated
database schema and export data in the new Avro schema. The data export process
does not need to pay any attention to the schema change—it can simply do the
schema conversion every time it runs. Anyone who reads the new data files will see
that the fields of the record have changed, but since the fields are identified by name,
the updated writer’s schema can still be matched up with the old reader’s schema.
By contrast, if you were using Thrift or Protocol Buffers for this purpose, the field
tags would likely have to be assigned by hand: every time the database schema
changes, an administrator would have to manually update the mapping from data‐
base column names to field tags. (It might be possible to automate this, but the
schema generator would have to be very careful to not assign previously used field
126 | Chapter 4: Encoding and Evolution

tags.) This kind of dynamically generated schema simply wasn’t a design goal of
Thrift or Protocol Buffers, whereas it was for Avro.
Code generation and dynamically typed languages
Thrift and Protocol Buffers rely on code generation: after a schema has been defined,
you can generate code that implements this schema in a programming language of
your choice. This is useful in statically typed languages such as Java, C++, or C#,
because it allows efficient in-memory structures to be used for decoded data, and it
allows type checking and autocompletion in IDEs when writing programs that access
the data structures.
In dynamically typed programming languages such as JavaScript, Ruby, or Python,
there is not much point in generating code, since there is no compile-time type
checker to satisfy. Code generation is often frowned upon in these languages, since
they otherwise avoid an explicit compilation step. Moreover, in the case of a dynami‐
cally generated schema (such as an Avro schema generated from a database table),
code generation is an unnecessarily obstacle to getting to the data.
Avro provides optional code generation for statically typed programming languages,
but it can be used just as well without any code generation. If you have an object con‐
tainer file (which embeds the writer’s schema), you can simply open it using the Avro
library and look at the data in the same way as you could look at a JSON file. The file
is self-describing since it includes all the necessary metadata.
This property is especially useful in conjunction with dynamically typed data pro‐
cessing languages like Apache Pig [ 26]. In Pig, you can just open some Avro files,
start analyzing them, and write derived datasets to output files in Avro format
without even thinking about schemas. 
The Merits of Schemas
As we saw, Protocol Buffers, Thrift, and Avro all use a schema to describe a binary
encoding format. Their schema languages are much simpler than XML Schema or
JSON Schema, which support much more detailed validation rules (e.g., “the string
value of this field must match this regular expression” or “the integer value of this
field must be between 0 and 100”). As Protocol Buffers, Thrift, and Avro are simpler
to implement and simpler to use, they have grown to support a fairly wide range of
programming languages.
The ideas on which these encodings are based are by no means new. For example,
they have a lot in common with ASN.1, a schema definition language that was first
standardized in 1984 [ 27]. It was used to define various network protocols, and its
binary encoding (DER) is still used to encode SSL certificates (X.509), for example
[28]. ASN.1 supports schema evolution using tag numbers, similar to Protocol Buf‐
Formats for Encoding Data | 127

fers and Thrift [ 29]. However, it’s also very complex and badly documented, so
ASN.1 is probably not a good choice for new applications.
Many data systems also implement some kind of proprietary binary encoding for
their data. For example, most relational databases have a network protocol over
which you can send queries to the database and get back responses. Those protocols
are generally specific to a particular database, and the database vendor provides a
driver (e.g., using the ODBC or JDBC APIs) that decodes responses from the data‐
base’s network protocol into in-memory data structures.
So, we can see that although textual data formats such as JSON, XML, and CSV are
widespread, binary encodings based on schemas are also a viable option. They have a
number of nice properties:
• They can be much more compact than the various “binary JSON” variants, since
they can omit field names from the encoded data.
• The schema is a valuable form of documentation, and because the schema is
required for decoding, you can be sure that it is up to date (whereas manually
maintained documentation may easily diverge from reality).
• Keeping a database of schemas allows you to check forward and backward com‐
patibility of schema changes, before anything is deployed.
• For users of statically typed programming languages, the ability to generate code
from the schema is useful, since it enables type checking at compile time.
In summary, schema evolution allows the same kind of flexibility as schemaless/
schema-on-read JSON databases provide (see “Schema flexibility in the document
model”  on page 39), while also providing better guarantees about your data and bet‐
ter tooling. 
Modes of Dataflow
At the beginning of this chapter we said that whenever you want to send some data to
another process with which you don’t share memory—for example, whenever you
want to send data over the network or write it to a file—you need to encode it as a
sequence of bytes. We then discussed a variety of different encodings for doing this.
We talked about forward and backward compatibility, which are important for evolv‐
ability (making change easy by allowing you to upgrade different parts of your system
independently, and not having to change everything at once). Compatibility is a rela‐
tionship between one process that encodes the data, and another process that decodes
it.
128 | Chapter 4: Encoding and Evolution

That’s a fairly abstract idea—there are many ways data can flow from one process to
another. Who encodes the data, and who decodes it? In the rest of this chapter we
will explore some of the most common ways how data flows between processes:
• Via databases (see “Dataflow Through Databases” on page 129 )
• Via service calls (see “Dataflow Through Services: REST and RPC” on page 131 )
• Via asynchronous message passing (see “Message-Passing Dataflow” on page 136 )
Dataflow Through Databases
In a database, the process that writes to the database encodes the data, and the pro‐
cess that reads from the database decodes it. There may just be a single process
accessing the database, in which case the reader is simply a later version of the same
process—in that case you can think of storing something in the database as sending a
message to your future self.
Backward compatibility is clearly necessary here; otherwise your future self won’t be
able to decode what you previously wrote.
In general, it’s common for several different processes to be accessing a database at
the same time. Those processes might be several different applications or services, or
they may simply be several instances of the same service (running in parallel for scal‐
ability or fault tolerance). Either way, in an environment where the application is
changing, it is likely that some processes accessing the database will be running newer
code and some will be running older code—for example because a new version is cur‐
rently being deployed in a rolling upgrade, so some instances have been updated
while others haven’t yet.
This means that a value in the database may be written by a newer version of the
code, and subsequently read by an older version of the code that is still running.
Thus, forward compatibility is also often required for databases.
However, there is an additional snag. Say you add a field to a record schema, and the
newer code writes a value for that new field to the database. Subsequently, an older
version of the code (which doesn’t yet know about the new field) reads the record,
updates it, and writes it back. In this situation, the desirable behavior is usually for
the old code to keep the new field intact, even though it couldn’t be interpreted.
The encoding formats discussed previously support such preservation of unknown
fields, but sometimes you need to take care at an application level, as illustrated in
Figure 4-7 . For example, if you decode a database value into model objects in the
application, and later reencode those model objects, the unknown field might be lost
in that translation process. Solving this is not a hard problem; you just need to be
aware of it.
Modes of Dataflow | 129