[9] “ XML Is a Poor Copy of S-Expressions,” c2.com wiki.
[10] Matt Harris: “ Snowflake: An Update and Some Very Important Information ,”
email to Twitter Development Talk mailing list, October 19, 2010.
[11] Shudi (Sandy) Gao, C. M. Sperberg-McQueen, and Henry S. Thompson: “ XML
Schema 1.1,” W3C Recommendation, May 2001.
[12] Francis Galiegue, Kris Zyp, and Gary Court: “ JSON Schema ,” IETF Internet-
Draft, February 2013.
[13] Yakov Shafranovich: “ RFC 4180: Common Format and MIME Type for
Comma-Separated Values (CSV) Files,” October 2005.
[14] “ MessagePack Specification,” msgpack.org.
[15] Mark Slee, Aditya Agarwal, and Marc Kwiatkowski: “ Thrift: Scalable Cross-
Language Services Implementation,” Facebook technical report, April 2007.
[16] “ Protocol Buffers Developer Guide,” Google, Inc., developers.google.com.
[17] Igor Anishchenko: “ Thrift vs Protocol Buffers vs Avro - Biased Comparison ,”
slideshare.net, September 17, 2012.
[18] “ A Matrix of the Features Each Individual Language Library Supports ,”
wiki.apache.org.
[19] Martin Kleppmann: “ Schema Evolution in Avro, Protocol Buffers and Thrift ,”
martin.kleppmann.com, December 5, 2012.
[20] “ Apache Avro 1.7.7 Documentation,” avro.apache.org, July 2014.
[21] Doug Cutting, Chad Walters, Jim Kellerman, et al.: “ [PROPOSAL] New Subpro‐
ject: Avro ,” email thread on hadoop-general mailing list, mail-archives.apache.org,
April 2009.
[22] Tony Hoare: “ Null References: The Billion Dollar Mistake ,” at QCon London ,
March 2009.
[23] Aditya Auradkar and Tom Quiggle: “ Introducing Espresso—LinkedIn’s Hot
New Distributed Document Store,” engineering.linkedin.com, January 21, 2015.
[24] Jay Kreps: “ Putting Apache Kafka to Use: A Practical Guide to Building a Stream
Data Platform (Part 2),” blog.confluent.io, February 25, 2015.
[25] Gwen Shapira: “ The Problem of Managing Schemas,” radar.oreilly.com, Novem‐
ber 4, 2014.
[26] “ Apache Pig 0.14.0 Documentation,” pig.apache.org, November 2014.
[27] John Larmouth: ASN.1 Complete . Morgan Kaufmann, 1999. ISBN:
978-0-122-33435-1
Summary | 141

[28] Russell Housley, Warwick Ford, Tim Polk, and David Solo: “ RFC 2459: Internet
X.509 Public Key Infrastructure: Certificate and CRL Profile ,” IETF Network Work‐
ing Group, Standards Track, January 1999.
[29] Lev Walkin: “ Question: Extensibility and Dropping Fields ,” lionet.info, Septem‐
ber 21, 2010.
[30] Jesse James Garrett: “ Ajax: A New Approach to Web Applications ,” adaptive‐
path.com, February 18, 2005.
[31] Sam Newman: Building Microservices . O’Reilly Media, 2015. ISBN:
978-1-491-95035-7
[32] Chris Richardson: “ Microservices: Decomposing Applications for Deployability
and Scalability,” infoq.com, May 25, 2014.
[33] Pat Helland: “ Data on the Outside Versus Data on the Inside ,” at 2nd Biennial
Conference on Innovative Data Systems Research (CIDR), January 2005.
[34] Roy Thomas Fielding: “ Architectural Styles and the Design of Network-Based
Software Architectures,” PhD Thesis, University of California, Irvine, 2000.
[35] Roy Thomas Fielding: “ REST APIs Must Be Hypertext-Driven ,” roy.gbiv.com,
October 20 2008.
[36] “ REST in Peace, SOAP,” royal.pingdom.com, October 15, 2010.
[37] “ Web Services Standards as of Q1 2007,” innoq.com, February 2007.
[38] Pete Lacey: “ The S Stands for Simple,” harmful.cat-v.org, November 15, 2006.
[39] Stefan Tilkov: “ Interview: Pete Lacey Criticizes Web Services ,” infoq.com,
December 12, 2006.
[40] “ OpenAPI Specification (fka Swagger RESTful API Documentation Specifica‐
tion) Version 2.0,” swagger.io, September 8, 2014.
[41] Michi Henning: “ The Rise and Fall of CORBA,” ACM Queue, volume 4, number
5, pages 28–34, June 2006. doi:10.1145/1142031.1142044
[42] Andrew D. Birrell and Bruce Jay Nelson: “ Implementing Remote Procedure
Calls,” ACM Transactions on Computer Systems  (TOCS), volume 2, number 1, pages
39–59, February 1984. doi:10.1145/2080.357392
[43] Jim Waldo, Geoff Wyant, Ann Wollrath, and Sam Kendall: “ A Note on Dis‐
tributed Computing ,” Sun Microsystems Laboratories, Inc., Technical Report
TR-94-29, November 1994.
[44] Steve Vinoski: “ Convenience over Correctness ,” IEEE Internet Computing , vol‐
ume 12, number 4, pages 89–92, July 2008. doi:10.1109/MIC.2008.75
142 | Chapter 4: Encoding and Evolution

[45] Marius Eriksen: “ Your Server as a Function ,” at 7th Workshop on Programming
Languages and Operating Systems  (PLOS), November 2013. doi:
10.1145/2525528.2525538
[46] “ grpc-common Documentation,” Google, Inc., github.com, February 2015.
[47] Aditya Narayan and Irina Singh: “ Designing and Versioning Compatible Web
Services,” ibm.com, March 28, 2007.
[48] Troy Hunt: “ Your API Versioning Is Wrong, Which Is Why I Decided to Do It 3
Different Wrong Ways,” troyhunt.com, February 10, 2014.
[49] “ API Upgrades,” Stripe, Inc., April 2015.
[50] Jonas Bonér: “ Upgrade in an Akka Cluster,” email to akka-user mailing list, grok‐
base.com, August 28, 2013.
[51] Philip A. Bernstein, Sergey Bykov, Alan Geller, et al.: “ Orleans: Distributed Vir‐
tual Actors for Programmability and Scalability ,” Microsoft Research Technical
Report MSR-TR-2014-41, March 2014.
[52] “ Microsoft Project Orleans Documentation ,” Microsoft Research, dotnet.git‐
hub.io, 2015.
[53] David Mercer, Sean Hinde, Yinso Chen, and Richard A O’Keefe: “ beginner:
Updating Data Structures,” email thread on erlang-questions mailing list, erlang.com,
October 29, 2007.
[54] Fred Hebert: “ Postscript: Maps,” learnyousomeerlang.com, April 9, 2014.
Summary | 143

PART II
Distributed Data
For a successful technology, reality must take precedence over public relations, for nature
cannot be fooled.
—Richard Feynman, Rogers Commission Report (1986)
In Part I of this book, we discussed aspects of data systems that apply when data is
stored on a single machine. Now, in Part II, we move up a level and ask: what hap‐
pens if multiple machines are involved in storage and retrieval of data?
There are various reasons why you might want to distribute a database across multi‐
ple machines:
Scalability
If your data volume, read load, or write load grows bigger than a single machine
can handle, you can potentially spread the load across multiple machines.
Fault tolerance/high availability
If your application needs to continue working even if one machine (or several
machines, or the network, or an entire datacenter) goes down, you can use multi‐
ple machines to give you redundancy. When one fails, another one can take over.
Latency
If you have users around the world, you might want to have servers at various
locations worldwide so that each user can be served from a datacenter that is geo‐
graphically close to them. That avoids the users having to wait for network pack‐
ets to travel halfway around the world.

i. In a large machine, although any CPU can access any part of memory, some banks of memory are closer to
one CPU than to others (this is called nonuniform memory access, or NUMA [1]). To make efficient use of
this architecture, the processing needs to be broken down so that each CPU mostly accesses memory that is
nearby—which means that partitioning is still required, even when ostensibly running on one machine.
ii. Network Attached Storage (NAS) or Storage Area Network (SAN).
Scaling to Higher Load
If all you need is to scale to higher load, the simplest approach is to buy a more pow‐
erful machine (sometimes called vertical scaling  or scaling up ). Many CPUs, many
RAM chips, and many disks can be joined together under one operating system, and
a fast interconnect allows any CPU to access any part of the memory or disk. In this
kind of shared-memory architecture , all the components can be treated as a single
machine [1].i
The problem with a shared-memory approach is that the cost grows faster than line‐
arly: a machine with twice as many CPUs, twice as much RAM, and twice as much
disk capacity as another typically costs significantly more than twice as much. And
due to bottlenecks, a machine twice the size cannot necessarily handle twice the load.
A shared-memory architecture may offer limited fault tolerance—high-end machines
have hot-swappable components (you can replace disks, memory modules, and even
CPUs without shutting down the machines)—but it is definitely limited to a single
geographic location.
Another approach is the shared-disk architecture, which uses several machines with
independent CPUs and RAM, but stores data on an array of disks that is shared
between the machines, which are connected via a fast network. ii This architecture is
used for some data warehousing workloads, but contention and the overhead of lock‐
ing limit the scalability of the shared-disk approach [2].
Shared-Nothing Architectures
By contrast, shared-nothing architectures [3] (sometimes called horizontal scaling or
scaling out) have gained a lot of popularity. In this approach, each machine or virtual
machine running the database software is called a node. Each node uses its CPUs,
RAM, and disks independently. Any coordination between nodes is done at the soft‐
ware level, using a conventional network.
No special hardware is required by a shared-nothing system, so you can use whatever
machines have the best price/performance ratio. You can potentially distribute data
across multiple geographic regions, and thus reduce latency for users and potentially
be able to survive the loss of an entire datacenter. With cloud deployments of virtual

machines, you don’t need to be operating at Google scale: even for small companies,
a multi-region distributed architecture is now feasible.
In this part of the book, we focus on shared-nothing architectures—not because they
are necessarily the best choice for every use case, but rather because they require the
most caution from you, the application developer. If your data is distributed across
multiple nodes, you need to be aware of the constraints and trade-offs that occur in
such a distributed system—the database cannot magically hide these from you.
While a distributed shared-nothing architecture has many advantages, it usually also
incurs additional complexity for applications and sometimes limits the expressive‐
ness of the data models you can use. In some cases, a simple single-threaded program
can perform significantly better than a cluster with over 100 CPU cores [ 4]. On the
other hand, shared-nothing systems can be very powerful. The next few chapters go
into details on the issues that arise when data is distributed. 
Replication Versus Partitioning
There are two common ways data is distributed across multiple nodes:
Replication
Keeping a copy of the same data on several different nodes, potentially in differ‐
ent locations. Replication provides redundancy: if some nodes are unavailable,
the data can still be served from the remaining nodes. Replication can also help
improve performance. We discuss replication in Chapter 5.
Partitioning
Splitting a big database into smaller subsets called partitions so that different par‐
titions can be assigned to different nodes (also known as sharding). We discuss
partitioning in Chapter 6.
These are separate mechanisms, but they often go hand in hand, as illustrated in
Figure II-1.

Figure II-1. A database split into two partitions, with two replicas per partition.
With an understanding of those concepts, we can discuss the difficult trade-offs that
you need to make in a distributed system. We’ll discuss transactions in Chapter 7, as
that will help you understand all the many things that can go wrong in a data system,
and what you can do about them. We’ll conclude this part of the book by discussing
the fundamental limitations of distributed systems in Chapters 8 and 9.
Later, in Part III of this book, we will discuss how you can take several (potentially
distributed) datastores and integrate them into a larger system, satisfying the needs of
a complex application. But first, let’s talk about distributed data.
References
[1] Ulrich Drepper: “ What Every Programmer Should Know About Memory ,” akka‐
dia.org, November 21, 2007.
[2] Ben Stopford: “ Shared Nothing vs. Shared Disk Architectures: An Independent
View,” benstopford.com, November 24, 2009.
[3] Michael Stonebraker: “ The Case for Shared Nothing,” IEEE Database Engineering
Bulletin, volume 9, number 1, pages 4–9, March 1986.
[4] Frank McSherry, Michael Isard, and Derek G. Murray: “ Scalability! But at What
COST?,” at 15th USENIX Workshop on Hot Topics in Operating Systems  (HotOS),
May 2015.

CHAPTER 5
Replication
The major difference between a thing that might go wrong and a thing that cannot possibly
go wrong is that when a thing that cannot possibly go wrong goes wrong it usually turns out
to be impossible to get at or repair.
—Douglas Adams, Mostly Harmless (1992)
Replication means keeping a copy of the same data on multiple machines that are
connected via a network. As discussed in the introduction to Part II, there are several
reasons why you might want to replicate data:
• To keep data geographically close to your users (and thus reduce latency)
• To allow the system to continue working even if some of its parts have failed
(and thus increase availability)
• To scale out the number of machines that can serve read queries (and thus
increase read throughput)
In this chapter we will assume that your dataset is so small that each machine can
hold a copy of the entire dataset. In Chapter 6 we will relax that assumption and dis‐
cuss partitioning (sharding) of datasets that are too big for a single machine. In later
chapters we will discuss various kinds of faults that can occur in a replicated data sys‐
tem, and how to deal with them.
If the data that you’re replicating does not change over time, then replication is easy:
you just need to copy the data to every node once, and you’re done. All of the diffi‐
culty in replication lies in handling changes to replicated data, and that’s what this
chapter is about. We will discuss three popular algorithms for replicating changes
between nodes: single-leader, multi-leader, and leaderless replication. Almost all dis‐
tributed databases use one of these three approaches. They all have various pros and
cons, which we will examine in detail.
151

i. Different people have different definitions for hot, warm, and cold standby servers. In PostgreSQL, for
example, hot standby is used to refer to a replica that accepts reads from clients, whereas a warm standby
processes changes from the leader but doesn’t process any queries from clients. For purposes of this book, the
difference isn’t important.
There are many trade-offs to consider with replication: for example, whether to use
synchronous or asynchronous replication, and how to handle failed replicas. Those
are often configuration options in databases, and although the details vary by data‐
base, the general principles are similar across many different implementations. We
will discuss the consequences of such choices in this chapter.
Replication of databases is an old topic—the principles haven’t changed much since
they were studied in the 1970s [ 1], because the fundamental constraints of networks
have remained the same. However, outside of research, many developers continued
to assume for a long time that a database consisted of just one node. Mainstream use
of distributed databases is more recent. Since many application developers are new to
this area, there has been a lot of misunderstanding around issues such as eventual
consistency. In “Problems with Replication Lag”  on page 161 we will get more precise
about eventual consistency and discuss things like the read-your-writes and mono‐
tonic reads guarantees.
Leaders and Followers
Each node that stores a copy of the database is called a replica. With multiple replicas,
a question inevitably arises: how do we ensure that all the data ends up on all the rep‐
licas?
Every write to the database needs to be processed by every replica; otherwise, the rep‐
licas would no longer contain the same data. The most common solution for this is
called leader-based replication (also known as active/passive or master–slave replica‐
tion) and is illustrated in Figure 5-1. It works as follows:
1. One of the replicas is designated the leader (also known as master or primary).
When clients want to write to the database, they must send their requests to the
leader, which first writes the new data to its local storage.
2. The other replicas are known as followers (read replicas, slaves, secondaries, or hot
standbys).i Whenever the leader writes new data to its local storage, it also sends
the data change to all of its followers as part of a replication log or change stream.
Each follower takes the log from the leader and updates its local copy of the data‐
base accordingly, by applying all writes in the same order as they were processed
on the leader.
152 | Chapter 5: Replication

3. When a client wants to read from the database, it can query either the leader or
any of the followers. However, writes are only accepted on the leader (the follow‐
ers are read-only from the client’s point of view).
Figure 5-1. Leader-based (master–slave) replication.
This mode of replication is a built-in feature of many relational databases, such as
PostgreSQL (since version 9.0), MySQL, Oracle Data Guard [ 2], and SQL Server’s
AlwaysOn Availability Groups [ 3]. It is also used in some nonrelational databases,
including MongoDB, RethinkDB, and Espresso [ 4]. Finally, leader-based replication
is not restricted to only databases: distributed message brokers such as Kafka [ 5] and
RabbitMQ highly available queues [ 6] also use it. Some network filesystems and
replicated block devices such as DRBD are similar.
Synchronous Versus Asynchronous Replication
An important detail of a replicated system is whether the replication happens syn‐
chronously or asynchronously. (In relational databases, this is often a configurable
option; other systems are often hardcoded to be either one or the other.)
Think about what happens in Figure 5-1, where the user of a website updates their
profile image. At some point in time, the client sends the update request to the leader;
shortly afterward, it is received by the leader. At some point, the leader forwards the
data change to the followers. Eventually, the leader notifies the client that the update
was successful.
Figure 5-2 shows the communication between various components of the system: the
user’s client, the leader, and two followers. Time flows from left to right. A request or
response message is shown as a thick arrow.
Leaders and Followers | 153

Figure 5-2. Leader-based replication with one synchronous and one asynchronous fol‐
lower.
In the example of Figure 5-2, the replication to follower 1 is synchronous: the leader
waits until follower 1 has confirmed that it received the write before reporting success
to the user, and before making the write visible to other clients. The replication to
follower 2 is asynchronous: the leader sends the message, but doesn’t wait for a
response from the follower.
The diagram shows that there is a substantial delay before follower 2 processes the
message. Normally, replication is quite fast: most database systems apply changes to
followers in less than a second. However, there is no guarantee of how long it might
take. There are circumstances when followers might fall behind the leader by several
minutes or more; for example, if a follower is recovering from a failure, if the system
is operating near maximum capacity, or if there are network problems between the
nodes.
The advantage of synchronous replication is that the follower is guaranteed to have
an up-to-date copy of the data that is consistent with the leader. If the leader sud‐
denly fails, we can be sure that the data is still available on the follower. The disad‐
vantage is that if the synchronous follower doesn’t respond (because it has crashed,
or there is a network fault, or for any other reason), the write cannot be processed.
The leader must block all writes and wait until the synchronous replica is available
again.
For that reason, it is impractical for all followers to be synchronous: any one node
outage would cause the whole system to grind to a halt. In practice, if you enable syn‐
chronous replication on a database, it usually means that one of the followers is syn‐
chronous, and the others are asynchronous. If the synchronous follower becomes
unavailable or slow, one of the asynchronous followers is made synchronous. This
guarantees that you have an up-to-date copy of the data on at least two nodes: the
154 | Chapter 5: Replication

leader and one synchronous follower. This configuration is sometimes also called
semi-synchronous [7].
Often, leader-based replication is configured to be completely asynchronous. In this
case, if the leader fails and is not recoverable, any writes that have not yet been repli‐
cated to followers are lost. This means that a write is not guaranteed to be durable,
even if it has been confirmed to the client. However, a fully asynchronous configura‐
tion has the advantage that the leader can continue processing writes, even if all of its
followers have fallen behind.
Weakening durability may sound like a bad trade-off, but asynchronous replication is
nevertheless widely used, especially if there are many followers or if they are geo‐
graphically distributed. We will return to this issue in “Problems with Replication
Lag” on page 161 .
Research on Replication
It can be a serious problem for asynchronously replicated systems to lose data if the
leader fails, so researchers have continued investigating replication methods that do
not lose data but still provide good performance and availability. For example, chain
replication [8, 9] is a variant of synchronous replication that has been successfully
implemented in a few systems such as Microsoft Azure Storage [10, 11].
There is a strong connection between consistency of replication and consensus (get‐
ting several nodes to agree on a value), and we will explore this area of theory in more
detail in Chapter 9. In this chapter we will concentrate on the simpler forms of repli‐
cation that are most commonly used in databases in practice. 
Setting Up New Followers
From time to time, you need to set up new followers—perhaps to increase the num‐
ber of replicas, or to replace failed nodes. How do you ensure that the new follower
has an accurate copy of the leader’s data?
Simply copying data files from one node to another is typically not sufficient: clients
are constantly writing to the database, and the data is always in flux, so a standard file
copy would see different parts of the database at different points in time. The result
might not make any sense.
You could make the files on disk consistent by locking the database (making it
unavailable for writes), but that would go against our goal of high availability. Fortu‐
nately, setting up a follower can usually be done without downtime. Conceptually,
the process looks like this:
Leaders and Followers | 155

1. Take a consistent snapshot of the leader’s database at some point in time—if pos‐
sible, without taking a lock on the entire database. Most databases have this fea‐
ture, as it is also required for backups. In some cases, third-party tools are
needed, such as innobackupex for MySQL [12].
2. Copy the snapshot to the new follower node.
3. The follower connects to the leader and requests all the data changes that have
happened since the snapshot was taken. This requires that the snapshot is associ‐
ated with an exact position in the leader’s replication log. That position has vari‐
ous names: for example, PostgreSQL calls it the log sequence number , and
MySQL calls it the binlog coordinates.
4. When the follower has processed the backlog of data changes since the snapshot,
we say it has caught up. It can now continue to process data changes from the
leader as they happen.
The practical steps of setting up a follower vary significantly by database. In some
systems the process is fully automated, whereas in others it can be a somewhat arcane
multi-step workflow that needs to be manually performed by an administrator.
Handling Node Outages
Any node in the system can go down, perhaps unexpectedly due to a fault, but just as
likely due to planned maintenance (for example, rebooting a machine to install a ker‐
nel security patch). Being able to reboot individual nodes without downtime is a big
advantage for operations and maintenance. Thus, our goal is to keep the system as a
whole running despite individual node failures, and to keep the impact of a node out‐
age as small as possible.
How do you achieve high availability with leader-based replication?
Follower failure: Catch-up recovery
On its local disk, each follower keeps a log of the data changes it has received from
the leader. If a follower crashes and is restarted, or if the network between the leader
and the follower is temporarily interrupted, the follower can recover quite easily:
from its log, it knows the last transaction that was processed before the fault occur‐
red. Thus, the follower can connect to the leader and request all the data changes that
occurred during the time when the follower was disconnected. When it has applied
these changes, it has caught up to the leader and can continue receiving a stream of
data changes as before.
156 | Chapter 5: Replication

Leader failure: Failover
Handling a failure of the leader is trickier: one of the followers needs to be promoted
to be the new leader, clients need to be reconfigured to send their writes to the new
leader, and the other followers need to start consuming data changes from the new
leader. This process is called failover.
Failover can happen manually (an administrator is notified that the leader has failed
and takes the necessary steps to make a new leader) or automatically. An automatic
failover process usually consists of the following steps:
1. Determining that the leader has failed.  There are many things that could poten‐
tially go wrong: crashes, power outages, network issues, and more. There is no
foolproof way of detecting what has gone wrong, so most systems simply use a
timeout: nodes frequently bounce messages back and forth between each other,
and if a node doesn’t respond for some period of time—say, 30 seconds—it is
assumed to be dead. (If the leader is deliberately taken down for planned mainte‐
nance, this doesn’t apply.)
2. Choosing a new leader.  This could be done through an election process (where
the leader is chosen by a majority of the remaining replicas), or a new leader
could be appointed by a previously elected controller node. The best candidate for
leadership is usually the replica with the most up-to-date data changes from the
old leader (to minimize any data loss). Getting all the nodes to agree on a new
leader is a consensus problem, discussed in detail in Chapter 9.
3. Reconfiguring the system to use the new leader.  Clients now need to send
their write requests to the new leader (we discuss this in “Request Routing” on
page 214). If the old leader comes back, it might still believe that it is the leader,
not realizing that the other replicas have forced it to step down. The system
needs to ensure that the old leader becomes a follower and recognizes the new
leader.
Failover is fraught with things that can go wrong:
• If asynchronous replication is used, the new leader may not have received all the
writes from the old leader before it failed. If the former leader rejoins the cluster
after a new leader has been chosen, what should happen to those writes? The new
leader may have received conflicting writes in the meantime. The most common
solution is for the old leader’s unreplicated writes to simply be discarded, which
may violate clients’ durability expectations.
• Discarding writes is especially dangerous if other storage systems outside of the
database need to be coordinated with the database contents. For example, in one
incident at GitHub [13], an out-of-date MySQL follower was promoted to leader.
The database used an autoincrementing counter to assign primary keys to new
Leaders and Followers | 157

ii. This approach is known as fencing or, more emphatically, Shoot The Other Node In The Head (STONITH).
We will discuss fencing in more detail in “The leader and the lock” on page 301 .
rows, but because the new leader’s counter lagged behind the old leader’s, it
reused some primary keys that were previously assigned by the old leader. These
primary keys were also used in a Redis store, so the reuse of primary keys resul‐
ted in inconsistency between MySQL and Redis, which caused some private data
to be disclosed to the wrong users.
• In certain fault scenarios (see Chapter 8), it could happen that two nodes both
believe that they are the leader. This situation is called split brain, and it is dan‐
gerous: if both leaders accept writes, and there is no process for resolving con‐
flicts (see “Multi-Leader Replication” on page 168), data is likely to be lost or
corrupted. As a safety catch, some systems have a mechanism to shut down one
node if two leaders are detected. ii However, if this mechanism is not carefully
designed, you can end up with both nodes being shut down [14].
• What is the right timeout before the leader is declared dead? A longer timeout
means a longer time to recovery in the case where the leader fails. However, if the
timeout is too short, there could be unnecessary failovers. For example, a tempo‐
rary load spike could cause a node’s response time to increase above the timeout,
or a network glitch could cause delayed packets. If the system is already strug‐
gling with high load or network problems, an unnecessary failover is likely to
make the situation worse, not better.
There are no easy solutions to these problems. For this reason, some operations
teams prefer to perform failovers manually, even if the software supports automatic
failover.
These issues—node failures; unreliable networks; and trade-offs around replica con‐
sistency, durability, availability, and latency—are in fact fundamental problems in
distributed systems. In Chapter 8  and Chapter 9  we will discuss them in greater
depth.
Implementation of Replication Logs
How does leader-based replication work under the hood? Several different replica‐
tion methods are used in practice, so let’s look at each one briefly.
Statement-based replication
In the simplest case, the leader logs every write request ( statement) that it executes
and sends that statement log to its followers. For a relational database, this means
that every INSERT, UPDATE, or DELETE statement is forwarded to followers, and each
158 | Chapter 5: Replication

follower parses and executes that SQL statement as if it had been received from a
client.
Although this may sound reasonable, there are various ways in which this approach
to replication can break down:
• Any statement that calls a nondeterministic function, such as NOW() to get the
current date and time or RAND() to get a random number, is likely to generate a
different value on each replica.
• If statements use an autoincrementing column, or if they depend on the existing
data in the database (e.g., UPDATE … WHERE <some condition> ), they must be
executed in exactly the same order on each replica, or else they may have a differ‐
ent effect. This can be limiting when there are multiple concurrently executing
transactions.
• Statements that have side effects (e.g., triggers, stored procedures, user-defined
functions) may result in different side effects occurring on each replica, unless
the side effects are absolutely deterministic.
It is possible to work around those issues—for example, the leader can replace any
nondeterministic function calls with a fixed return value when the statement is log‐
ged so that the followers all get the same value. However, because there are so many
edge cases, other replication methods are now generally preferred.
Statement-based replication was used in MySQL before version 5.1. It is still some‐
times used today, as it is quite compact, but by default MySQL now switches to row-
based replication (discussed shortly) if there is any nondeterminism in a statement.
VoltDB uses statement-based replication, and makes it safe by requiring transactions
to be deterministic [15].
Write-ahead log (WAL) shipping
In Chapter 3 we discussed how storage engines represent data on disk, and we found
that usually every write is appended to a log:
• In the case of a log-structured storage engine (see “SSTables and LSM-Trees” on
page 76), this log is the main place for storage. Log segments are compacted and
garbage-collected in the background.
• In the case of a B-tree (see “B-Trees”  on page 79), which overwrites individual
disk blocks, every modification is first written to a write-ahead log so that the
index can be restored to a consistent state after a crash.
In either case, the log is an append-only sequence of bytes containing all writes to the
database. We can use the exact same log to build a replica on another node: besides
writing the log to disk, the leader also sends it across the network to its followers.
Leaders and Followers | 159

When the follower processes this log, it builds a copy of the exact same data struc‐
tures as found on the leader.
This method of replication is used in PostgreSQL and Oracle, among others [16]. The
main disadvantage is that the log describes the data on a very low level: a WAL con‐
tains details of which bytes were changed in which disk blocks. This makes replica‐
tion closely coupled to the storage engine. If the database changes its storage format
from one version to another, it is typically not possible to run different versions of
the database software on the leader and the followers.
That may seem like a minor implementation detail, but it can have a big operational
impact. If the replication protocol allows the follower to use a newer software version
than the leader, you can perform a zero-downtime upgrade of the database software
by first upgrading the followers and then performing a failover to make one of the
upgraded nodes the new leader. If the replication protocol does not allow this version
mismatch, as is often the case with WAL shipping, such upgrades require downtime.
Logical (row-based) log replication
An alternative is to use different log formats for replication and for the storage
engine, which allows the replication log to be decoupled from the storage engine
internals. This kind of replication log is called a logical log, to distinguish it from the
storage engine’s ( physical) data representation.
A logical log for a relational database is usually a sequence of records describing
writes to database tables at the granularity of a row:
• For an inserted row, the log contains the new values of all columns.
• For a deleted row, the log contains enough information to uniquely identify the
row that was deleted. Typically this would be the primary key, but if there is no
primary key on the table, the old values of all columns need to be logged.
• For an updated row, the log contains enough information to uniquely identify
the updated row, and the new values of all columns (or at least the new values of
all columns that changed).
A transaction that modifies several rows generates several such log records, followed
by a record indicating that the transaction was committed. MySQL’s binlog (when
configured to use row-based replication) uses this approach [17].
Since a logical log is decoupled from the storage engine internals, it can more easily
be kept backward compatible, allowing the leader and the follower to run different
versions of the database software, or even different storage engines.
A logical log format is also easier for external applications to parse. This aspect is use‐
ful if you want to send the contents of a database to an external system, such as a data
160 | Chapter 5: Replication

warehouse for offline analysis, or for building custom indexes and caches [ 18]. This
technique is called change data capture, and we will return to it in Chapter 11.
Trigger-based replication
The replication approaches described so far are implemented by the database system,
without involving any application code. In many cases, that’s what you want—but
there are some circumstances where more flexibility is needed. For example, if you
want to only replicate a subset of the data, or want to replicate from one kind of
database to another, or if you need conflict resolution logic (see “Handling Write
Conflicts” on page 171 ), then you may need to move replication up to the application
layer.
Some tools, such as Oracle GoldenGate [ 19], can make data changes available to an
application by reading the database log. An alternative is to use features that are
available in many relational databases: triggers and stored procedures.
A trigger lets you register custom application code that is automatically executed
when a data change (write transaction) occurs in a database system. The trigger has
the opportunity to log this change into a separate table, from which it can be read by
an external process. That external process can then apply any necessary application
logic and replicate the data change to another system. Databus for Oracle [ 20] and
Bucardo for Postgres [21] work like this, for example.
Trigger-based replication typically has greater overheads than other replication
methods, and is more prone to bugs and limitations than the database’s built-in repli‐
cation. However, it can nevertheless be useful due to its flexibility. 
Problems with Replication Lag
Being able to tolerate node failures is just one reason for wanting replication. As
mentioned in the introduction to Part II , other reasons are scalability (processing
more requests than a single machine can handle) and latency (placing replicas geo‐
graphically closer to users).
Leader-based replication requires all writes to go through a single node, but read-
only queries can go to any replica. For workloads that consist of mostly reads and
only a small percentage of writes (a common pattern on the web), there is an attrac‐
tive option: create many followers, and distribute the read requests across those fol‐
lowers. This removes load from the leader and allows read requests to be served by
nearby replicas.
In this read-scaling architecture, you can increase the capacity for serving read-only
requests simply by adding more followers. However, this approach only realistically
works with asynchronous replication—if you tried to synchronously replicate to all
followers, a single node failure or network outage would make the entire system
Problems with Replication Lag | 161

iii. The term eventual consistency was coined by Douglas Terry et al. [24], popularized by Werner Vogels
[22], and became the battle cry of many NoSQL projects. However, not only NoSQL databases are eventually
consistent: followers in an asynchronously replicated relational database have the same characteristics.
unavailable for writing. And the more nodes you have, the likelier it is that one will
be down, so a fully synchronous configuration would be very unreliable.
Unfortunately, if an application reads from an asynchronous follower, it may see out‐
dated information if the follower has fallen behind. This leads to apparent inconsis‐
tencies in the database: if you run the same query on the leader and a follower at the
same time, you may get different results, because not all writes have been reflected in
the follower. This inconsistency is just a temporary state—if you stop writing to the
database and wait a while, the followers will eventually catch up and become consis‐
tent with the leader. For that reason, this effect is known as eventual consistency [22,
23].iii
The term “eventually” is deliberately vague: in general, there is no limit to how far a
replica can fall behind. In normal operation, the delay between a write happening on
the leader and being reflected on a follower—the replication lag—may be only a frac‐
tion of a second, and not noticeable in practice. However, if the system is operating
near capacity or if there is a problem in the network, the lag can easily increase to
several seconds or even minutes.
When the lag is so large, the inconsistencies it introduces are not just a theoretical
issue but a real problem for applications. In this section we will highlight three exam‐
ples of problems that are likely to occur when there is replication lag and outline
some approaches to solving them.
Reading Your Own Writes
Many applications let the user submit some data and then view what they have sub‐
mitted. This might be a record in a customer database, or a comment on a discussion
thread, or something else of that sort. When new data is submitted, it must be sent to
the leader, but when the user views the data, it can be read from a follower. This is
especially appropriate if data is frequently viewed but only occasionally written.
With asynchronous replication, there is a problem, illustrated in Figure 5-3 : if the
user views the data shortly after making a write, the new data may not yet have
reached the replica. To the user, it looks as though the data they submitted was lost,
so they will be understandably unhappy.
162 | Chapter 5: Replication

Figure 5-3. A user makes a write, followed by a read from a stale replica. To prevent
this anomaly, we need read-after-write consistency.
In this situation, we need read-after-write consistency, also known as read-your-writes
consistency [24]. This is a guarantee that if the user reloads the page, they will always
see any updates they submitted themselves. It makes no promises about other users:
other users’ updates may not be visible until some later time. However, it reassures
the user that their own input has been saved correctly.
How can we implement read-after-write consistency in a system with leader-based
replication? There are various possible techniques. To mention a few:
• When reading something that the user may have modified, read it from the
leader; otherwise, read it from a follower. This requires that you have some way
of knowing whether something might have been modified, without actually
querying it. For example, user profile information on a social network is nor‐
mally only editable by the owner of the profile, not by anybody else. Thus, a sim‐
ple rule is: always read the user’s own profile from the leader, and any other
users’ profiles from a follower.
• If most things in the application are potentially editable by the user, that
approach won’t be effective, as most things would have to be read from the
leader (negating the benefit of read scaling). In that case, other criteria may be
used to decide whether to read from the leader. For example, you could track the
time of the last update and, for one minute after the last update, make all reads
from the leader. You could also monitor the replication lag on followers and pre‐
vent queries on any follower that is more than one minute behind the leader.
• The client can remember the timestamp of its most recent write—then the sys‐
tem can ensure that the replica serving any reads for that user reflects updates at
least until that timestamp. If a replica is not sufficiently up to date, either the read
can be handled by another replica or the query can wait until the replica has
Problems with Replication Lag | 163

caught up. The timestamp could be a logical timestamp (something that indicates
ordering of writes, such as the log sequence number) or the actual system clock
(in which case clock synchronization becomes critical; see “Unreliable Clocks”
on page 287).
• If your replicas are distributed across multiple datacenters (for geographical
proximity to users or for availability), there is additional complexity. Any request
that needs to be served by the leader must be routed to the datacenter that con‐
tains the leader.
Another complication arises when the same user is accessing your service from mul‐
tiple devices, for example a desktop web browser and a mobile app. In this case you
may want to provide cross-device read-after-write consistency: if the user enters some
information on one device and then views it on another device, they should see the
information they just entered.
In this case, there are some additional issues to consider:
• Approaches that require remembering the timestamp of the user’s last update
become more difficult, because the code running on one device doesn’t know
what updates have happened on the other device. This metadata will need to be
centralized.
• If your replicas are distributed across different datacenters, there is no guarantee
that connections from different devices will be routed to the same datacenter.
(For example, if the user’s desktop computer uses the home broadband connec‐
tion and their mobile device uses the cellular data network, the devices’ network
routes may be completely different.) If your approach requires reading from the
leader, you may first need to route requests from all of a user’s devices to the
same datacenter. 
Monotonic Reads
Our second example of an anomaly that can occur when reading from asynchronous
followers is that it’s possible for a user to see things moving backward in time.
This can happen if a user makes several reads from different replicas. For example,
Figure 5-4 shows user 2345 making the same query twice, first to a follower with little
lag, then to a follower with greater lag. (This scenario is quite likely if the user
refreshes a web page, and each request is routed to a random server.) The first query
returns a comment that was recently added by user 1234, but the second query
doesn’t return anything because the lagging follower has not yet picked up that write.
In effect, the second query is observing the system at an earlier point in time than the
first query. This wouldn’t be so bad if the first query hadn’t returned anything,
because user 2345 probably wouldn’t know that user 1234 had recently added a com‐
164 | Chapter 5: Replication

ment. However, it’s very confusing for user 2345 if they first see user 1234’s comment
appear, and then see it disappear again.
Figure 5-4. A user first reads from a fresh replica, then from a stale replica. Time
appears to go backward. To prevent this anomaly, we need monotonic reads.
Monotonic reads [23] is a guarantee that this kind of anomaly does not happen. It’s a
lesser guarantee than strong consistency, but a stronger guarantee than eventual con‐
sistency. When you read data, you may see an old value; monotonic reads only means
that if one user makes several reads in sequence, they will not see time go backward—
i.e., they will not read older data after having previously read newer data.
One way of achieving monotonic reads is to make sure that each user always makes
their reads from the same replica (different users can read from different replicas).
For example, the replica can be chosen based on a hash of the user ID, rather than
randomly. However, if that replica fails, the user’s queries will need to be rerouted to
another replica. 
Consistent Prefix Reads
Our third example of replication lag anomalies concerns violation of causality. Imag‐
ine the following short dialog between Mr. Poons and Mrs. Cake:
Mr. Poons
How far into the future can you see, Mrs. Cake?
Mrs. Cake
About ten seconds usually, Mr. Poons.
Problems with Replication Lag | 165

There is a causal dependency between those two sentences: Mrs. Cake heard Mr.
Poons’s question and answered it.
Now, imagine a third person is listening to this conversation through followers. The
things said by Mrs. Cake go through a follower with little lag, but the things said by
Mr. Poons have a longer replication lag (see Figure 5-5). This observer would hear
the following:
Mrs. Cake
About ten seconds usually, Mr. Poons.
Mr. Poons
How far into the future can you see, Mrs. Cake?
To the observer it looks as though Mrs. Cake is answering the question before Mr.
Poons has even asked it. Such psychic powers are impressive, but very confusing [25].
Figure 5-5. If some partitions are replicated slower than others, an observer may see the
answer before they see the question.
Preventing this kind of anomaly requires another type of guarantee: consistent prefix
reads [23]. This guarantee says that if a sequence of writes happens in a certain order,
then anyone reading those writes will see them appear in the same order.
This is a particular problem in partitioned (sharded) databases, which we will discuss
in Chapter 6. If the database always applies writes in the same order, reads always see
a consistent prefix, so this anomaly cannot happen. However, in many distributed
166 | Chapter 5: Replication

databases, different partitions operate independently, so there is no global ordering of
writes: when a user reads from the database, they may see some parts of the database
in an older state and some in a newer state.
One solution is to make sure that any writes that are causally related to each other are
written to the same partition—but in some applications that cannot be done effi‐
ciently. There are also algorithms that explicitly keep track of causal dependencies, a
topic that we will return to in “The “happens-before” relationship and concurrency”
on page 186. 
Solutions for Replication Lag
When working with an eventually consistent system, it is worth thinking about how
the application behaves if the replication lag increases to several minutes or even
hours. If the answer is “no problem,” that’s great. However, if the result is a bad expe‐
rience for users, it’s important to design the system to provide a stronger guarantee,
such as read-after-write. Pretending that replication is synchronous when in fact it is
asynchronous is a recipe for problems down the line.
As discussed earlier, there are ways in which an application can provide a stronger
guarantee than the underlying database—for example, by performing certain kinds of
reads on the leader. However, dealing with these issues in application code is com‐
plex and easy to get wrong.
It would be better if application developers didn’t have to worry about subtle replica‐
tion issues and could just trust their databases to “do the right thing.” This is why
transactions exist: they are a way for a database to provide stronger guarantees so that
the application can be simpler.
Single-node transactions have existed for a long time. However, in the move to dis‐
tributed (replicated and partitioned) databases, many systems have abandoned them,
claiming that transactions are too expensive in terms of performance and availability,
and asserting that eventual consistency is inevitable in a scalable system. There is
some truth in that statement, but it is overly simplistic, and we will develop a more
nuanced view over the course of the rest of this book. We will return to the topic of
transactions in Chapters 7 and 9, and we will discuss some alternative mechanisms in
Part III. 
Problems with Replication Lag | 167

iv. If the database is partitioned (see Chapter 6), each partition has one leader. Different partitions may have
their leaders on different nodes, but each partition must nevertheless have one leader node.
Multi-Leader Replication
So far in this chapter we have only considered replication architectures using a single
leader. Although that is a common approach, there are interesting alternatives.
Leader-based replication has one major downside: there is only one leader, and all
writes must go through it. iv If you can’t connect to the leader for any reason, for
example due to a network interruption between you and the leader, you can’t write to
the database.
A natural extension of the leader-based replication model is to allow more than one
node to accept writes. Replication still happens in the same way: each node that pro‐
cesses a write must forward that data change to all the other nodes. We call this a
multi-leader configuration (also known as master–master  or active/active replication).
In this setup, each leader simultaneously acts as a follower to the other leaders.
Use Cases for Multi-Leader Replication
It rarely makes sense to use a multi-leader setup within a single datacenter, because
the benefits rarely outweigh the added complexity. However, there are some situa‐
tions in which this configuration is reasonable.
Multi-datacenter operation
Imagine you have a database with replicas in several different datacenters (perhaps so
that you can tolerate failure of an entire datacenter, or perhaps in order to be closer
to your users). With a normal leader-based replication setup, the leader has to be in
one of the datacenters, and all writes must go through that datacenter.
In a multi-leader configuration, you can have a leader in each datacenter. Figure 5-6
shows what this architecture might look like. Within each datacenter, regular leader–
follower replication is used; between datacenters, each datacenter’s leader replicates
its changes to the leaders in other datacenters.
168 | Chapter 5: Replication

Figure 5-6. Multi-leader replication across multiple datacenters.
Let’s compare how the single-leader and multi-leader configurations fare in a multi-
datacenter deployment:
Performance
In a single-leader configuration, every write must go over the internet to the
datacenter with the leader. This can add significant latency to writes and might
contravene the purpose of having multiple datacenters in the first place. In a
multi-leader configuration, every write can be processed in the local datacenter
and is replicated asynchronously to the other datacenters. Thus, the inter-
datacenter network delay is hidden from users, which means the perceived per‐
formance may be better.
Tolerance of datacenter outages
In a single-leader configuration, if the datacenter with the leader fails, failover
can promote a follower in another datacenter to be leader. In a multi-leader con‐
figuration, each datacenter can continue operating independently of the others,
and replication catches up when the failed datacenter comes back online.
Tolerance of network problems
Traffic between datacenters usually goes over the public internet, which may be
less reliable than the local network within a datacenter. A single-leader configu‐
ration is very sensitive to problems in this inter-datacenter link, because writes
are made synchronously over this link. A multi-leader configuration with asyn‐
chronous replication can usually tolerate network problems better: a temporary
network interruption does not prevent writes being processed.
Multi-Leader Replication | 169

Some databases support multi-leader configurations by default, but it is also often
implemented with external tools, such as Tungsten Replicator for MySQL [ 26], BDR
for PostgreSQL [27], and GoldenGate for Oracle [19].
Although multi-leader replication has advantages, it also has a big downside: the
same data may be concurrently modified in two different datacenters, and those write
conflicts must be resolved (indicated as “conflict resolution” in Figure 5-6). We will
discuss this issue in “Handling Write Conflicts” on page 171 .
As multi-leader replication is a somewhat retrofitted feature in many databases, there
are often subtle configuration pitfalls and surprising interactions with other database
features. For example, autoincrementing keys, triggers, and integrity constraints can
be problematic. For this reason, multi-leader replication is often considered danger‐
ous territory that should be avoided if possible [28].
Clients with offline operation
Another situation in which multi-leader replication is appropriate is if you have an
application that needs to continue to work while it is disconnected from the internet.
For example, consider the calendar apps on your mobile phone, your laptop, and
other devices. You need to be able to see your meetings (make read requests) and
enter new meetings (make write requests) at any time, regardless of whether your
device currently has an internet connection. If you make any changes while you are
offline, they need to be synced with a server and your other devices when the device
is next online.
In this case, every device has a local database that acts as a leader (it accepts write
requests), and there is an asynchronous multi-leader replication process (sync)
between the replicas of your calendar on all of your devices. The replication lag may
be hours or even days, depending on when you have internet access available.
From an architectural point of view, this setup is essentially the same as multi-leader
replication between datacenters, taken to the extreme: each device is a “datacenter,”
and the network connection between them is extremely unreliable. As the rich his‐
tory of broken calendar sync implementations demonstrates, multi-leader replication
is a tricky thing to get right.
There are tools that aim to make this kind of multi-leader configuration easier. For
example, CouchDB is designed for this mode of operation [29].
Collaborative editing
Real-time collaborative editing  applications allow several people to edit a document
simultaneously. For example, Etherpad [ 30] and Google Docs [ 31] allow multiple
people to concurrently edit a text document or spreadsheet (the algorithm is briefly
discussed in “Automatic Conflict Resolution” on page 174 ).
170 | Chapter 5: Replication

We don’t usually think of collaborative editing as a database replication problem, but
it has a lot in common with the previously mentioned offline editing use case. When
one user edits a document, the changes are instantly applied to their local replica (the
state of the document in their web browser or client application) and asynchronously
replicated to the server and any other users who are editing the same document.
If you want to guarantee that there will be no editing conflicts, the application must
obtain a lock on the document before a user can edit it. If another user wants to edit
the same document, they first have to wait until the first user has committed their
changes and released the lock. This collaboration model is equivalent to single-leader
replication with transactions on the leader.
However, for faster collaboration, you may want to make the unit of change very
small (e.g., a single keystroke) and avoid locking. This approach allows multiple users
to edit simultaneously, but it also brings all the challenges of multi-leader replication,
including requiring conflict resolution [32].
Handling Write Conflicts
The biggest problem with multi-leader replication is that write conflicts can occur,
which means that conflict resolution is required.
For example, consider a wiki page that is simultaneously being edited by two users, as
shown in Figure 5-7 . User 1 changes the title of the page from A to B, and user 2
changes the title from A to C at the same time. Each user’s change is successfully
applied to their local leader. However, when the changes are asynchronously replica‐
ted, a conflict is detected [ 33]. This problem does not occur in a single-leader data‐
base.
Figure 5-7. A write conflict caused by two leaders concurrently updating the same
record.
Multi-Leader Replication | 171

Synchronous versus asynchronous conflict detection
In a single-leader database, the second writer will either block and wait for the first
write to complete, or abort the second write transaction, forcing the user to retry the
write. On the other hand, in a multi-leader setup, both writes are successful, and the
conflict is only detected asynchronously at some later point in time. At that time, it
may be too late to ask the user to resolve the conflict.
In principle, you could make the conflict detection synchronous—i.e., wait for the
write to be replicated to all replicas before telling the user that the write was success‐
ful. However, by doing so, you would lose the main advantage of multi-leader repli‐
cation: allowing each replica to accept writes independently. If you want synchronous
conflict detection, you might as well just use single-leader replication.
Conflict avoidance
The simplest strategy for dealing with conflicts is to avoid them: if the application can
ensure that all writes for a particular record go through the same leader, then con‐
flicts cannot occur. Since many implementations of multi-leader replication handle
conflicts quite poorly, avoiding conflicts is a frequently recommended approach [34].
For example, in an application where a user can edit their own data, you can ensure
that requests from a particular user are always routed to the same datacenter and use
the leader in that datacenter for reading and writing. Different users may have differ‐
ent “home” datacenters (perhaps picked based on geographic proximity to the user),
but from any one user’s point of view the configuration is essentially single-leader.
However, sometimes you might want to change the designated leader for a record—
perhaps because one datacenter has failed and you need to reroute traffic to another
datacenter, or perhaps because a user has moved to a different location and is now
closer to a different datacenter. In this situation, conflict avoidance breaks down, and
you have to deal with the possibility of concurrent writes on different leaders.
Converging toward a consistent state
A single-leader database applies writes in a sequential order: if there are several
updates to the same field, the last write determines the final value of the field.
In a multi-leader configuration, there is no defined ordering of writes, so it’s not clear
what the final value should be. In Figure 5-7, at leader 1 the title is first updated to B
and then to C; at leader 2 it is first updated to C and then to B. Neither order is “more
correct” than the other.
If each replica simply applied writes in the order that it saw the writes, the database
would end up in an inconsistent state: the final value would be C at leader 1 and B at
leader 2. That is not acceptable—every replication scheme must ensure that the data
is eventually the same in all replicas. Thus, the database must resolve the conflict in a
172 | Chapter 5: Replication

convergent way, which means that all replicas must arrive at the same final value
when all changes have been replicated.
There are various ways of achieving convergent conflict resolution:
• Give each write a unique ID (e.g., a timestamp, a long random number, a UUID,
or a hash of the key and value), pick the write with the highest ID as the winner,
and throw away the other writes. If a timestamp is used, this technique is known
as last write wins  (LWW). Although this approach is popular, it is dangerously
prone to data loss [ 35]. We will discuss LWW in more detail at the end of this
chapter (“Detecting Concurrent Writes” on page 184 ).
• Give each replica a unique ID, and let writes that originated at a higher-
numbered replica always take precedence over writes that originated at a lower-
numbered replica. This approach also implies data loss.
• Somehow merge the values together—e.g., order them alphabetically and then
concatenate them (in Figure 5-7 , the merged title might be something like
“B/C”).
• Record the conflict in an explicit data structure that preserves all information,
and write application code that resolves the conflict at some later time (perhaps
by prompting the user).
Custom conflict resolution logic
As the most appropriate way of resolving a conflict may depend on the application,
most multi-leader replication tools let you write conflict resolution logic using appli‐
cation code. That code may be executed on write or on read:
On write
As soon as the database system detects a conflict in the log of replicated changes,
it calls the conflict handler. For example, Bucardo allows you to write a snippet of
Perl for this purpose. This handler typically cannot prompt a user—it runs in a
background process and it must execute quickly.
On read
When a conflict is detected, all the conflicting writes are stored. The next time
the data is read, these multiple versions of the data are returned to the applica‐
tion. The application may prompt the user or automatically resolve the conflict,
and write the result back to the database. CouchDB works this way, for example.
Note that conflict resolution usually applies at the level of an individual row or docu‐
ment, not for an entire transaction [ 36]. Thus, if you have a transaction that atomi‐
cally makes several different writes (see Chapter 7 ), each write is still considered
separately for the purposes of conflict resolution.
Multi-Leader Replication | 173

Automatic Conflict Resolution
Conflict resolution rules can quickly become complicated, and custom code can be
error-prone. Amazon is a frequently cited example of surprising effects due to a con‐
flict resolution handler: for some time, the conflict resolution logic on the shopping
cart would preserve items added to the cart, but not items removed from the cart.
Thus, customers would sometimes see items reappearing in their carts even though
they had previously been removed [37].
There has been some interesting research into automatically resolving conflicts
caused by concurrent data modifications. A few lines of research are worth mention‐
ing:
• Conflict-free replicated datatypes (CRDTs) [32, 38] are a family of data structures
for sets, maps, ordered lists, counters, etc. that can be concurrently edited by
multiple users, and which automatically resolve conflicts in sensible ways. Some
CRDTs have been implemented in Riak 2.0 [39, 40].
• Mergeable persistent data structures  [41] track history explicitly, similarly to the
Git version control system, and use a three-way merge function (whereas CRDTs
use two-way merges).
• Operational transformation [42] is the conflict resolution algorithm behind col‐
laborative editing applications such as Etherpad [ 30] and Google Docs [ 31]. It
was designed particularly for concurrent editing of an ordered list of items, such
as the list of characters that constitute a text document.
Implementations of these algorithms in databases are still young, but it’s likely that
they will be integrated into more replicated data systems in the future. Automatic
conflict resolution could make multi-leader data synchronization much simpler for
applications to deal with. 
What is a conflict?
Some kinds of conflict are obvious. In the example in Figure 5-7, two writes concur‐
rently modified the same field in the same record, setting it to two different values.
There is little doubt that this is a conflict.
Other kinds of conflict can be more subtle to detect. For example, consider a meeting
room booking system: it tracks which room is booked by which group of people at
which time. This application needs to ensure that each room is only booked by one
group of people at any one time (i.e., there must not be any overlapping bookings for
the same room). In this case, a conflict may arise if two different bookings are created
for the same room at the same time. Even if the application checks availability before
174 | Chapter 5: Replication

v. Not to be confused with a star schema (see “Stars and Snowflakes: Schemas for Analytics” on page 93 ),
which describes the structure of a data model, not the communication topology between nodes.
allowing a user to make a booking, there can be a conflict if the two bookings are
made on two different leaders.
There isn’t a quick ready-made answer, but in the following chapters we will trace a
path toward a good understanding of this problem. We will see some more examples
of conflicts in Chapter 7, and in Chapter 12 we will discuss scalable approaches for
detecting and resolving conflicts in a replicated system. 
Multi-Leader Replication Topologies
A replication topology  describes the communication paths along which writes are
propagated from one node to another. If you have two leaders, like in Figure 5-7 ,
there is only one plausible topology: leader 1 must send all of its writes to leader 2,
and vice versa. With more than two leaders, various different topologies are possible.
Some examples are illustrated in Figure 5-8.
Figure 5-8. Three example topologies in which multi-leader replication can be set up.
The most general topology is all-to-all (Figure 5-8 [c]), in which every leader sends its
writes to every other leader. However, more restricted topologies are also used: for
example, MySQL by default supports only a circular topology  [34], in which each
node receives writes from one node and forwards those writes (plus any writes of its
own) to one other node. Another popular topology has the shape of a star:v one desig‐
nated root node forwards writes to all of the other nodes. The star topology can be
generalized to a tree.
In circular and star topologies, a write may need to pass through several nodes before
it reaches all replicas. Therefore, nodes need to forward data changes they receive
from other nodes. To prevent infinite replication loops, each node is given a unique
identifier, and in the replication log, each write is tagged with the identifiers of all the
nodes it has passed through [ 43]. When a node receives a data change that is tagged
Multi-Leader Replication | 175

with its own identifier, that data change is ignored, because the node knows that it
has already been processed.
A problem with circular and star topologies is that if just one node fails, it can inter‐
rupt the flow of replication messages between other nodes, causing them to be unable
to communicate until the node is fixed. The topology could be reconfigured to work
around the failed node, but in most deployments such reconfiguration would have to
be done manually. The fault tolerance of a more densely connected topology (such as
all-to-all) is better because it allows messages to travel along different paths, avoiding
a single point of failure.
On the other hand, all-to-all topologies can have issues too. In particular, some net‐
work links may be faster than others (e.g., due to network congestion), with the result
that some replication messages may “overtake” others, as illustrated in Figure 5-9.
Figure 5-9. With multi-leader replication, writes may arrive in the wrong order at some
replicas.
In Figure 5-9, client A inserts a row into a table on leader 1, and client B updates that
row on leader 3. However, leader 2 may receive the writes in a different order: it may
first receive the update (which, from its point of view, is an update to a row that does
not exist in the database) and only later receive the corresponding insert (which
should have preceded the update).
This is a problem of causality, similar to the one we saw in “Consistent Prefix Reads”
on page 165: the update depends on the prior insert, so we need to make sure that all
nodes process the insert first, and then the update. Simply attaching a timestamp to
176 | Chapter 5: Replication

vi. Dynamo is not available to users outside of Amazon. Confusingly, AWS offers a hosted database product
called DynamoDB, which uses a completely different architecture: it is based on single-leader replication.
every write is not sufficient, because clocks cannot be trusted to be sufficiently in sync
to correctly order these events at leader 2 (see Chapter 8).
To order these events correctly, a technique called version vectors can be used, which
we will discuss later in this chapter (see “Detecting Concurrent Writes”  on page 184).
However, conflict detection techniques are poorly implemented in many multi-leader
replication systems. For example, at the time of writing, PostgreSQL BDR does not
provide causal ordering of writes [ 27], and Tungsten Replicator for MySQL doesn’t
even try to detect conflicts [34].
If you are using a system with multi-leader replication, it is worth being aware of
these issues, carefully reading the documentation, and thoroughly testing your data‐
base to ensure that it really does provide the guarantees you believe it to have. 
Leaderless Replication
The replication approaches we have discussed so far in this chapter—single-leader
and multi-leader replication—are based on the idea that a client sends a write request
to one node (the leader), and the database system takes care of copying that write to
the other replicas. A leader determines the order in which writes should be processed,
and followers apply the leader’s writes in the same order.
Some data storage systems take a different approach, abandoning the concept of a
leader and allowing any replica to directly accept writes from clients. Some of the ear‐
liest replicated data systems were leaderless [ 1, 44], but the idea was mostly forgotten
during the era of dominance of relational databases. It once again became a fashiona‐
ble architecture for databases after Amazon used it for its in-house Dynamo system
[37].vi Riak, Cassandra, and Voldemort are open source datastores with leaderless
replication models inspired by Dynamo, so this kind of database is also known as
Dynamo-style.
In some leaderless implementations, the client directly sends its writes to several rep‐
licas, while in others, a coordinator node does this on behalf of the client. However,
unlike a leader database, that coordinator does not enforce a particular ordering of
writes. As we shall see, this difference in design has profound consequences for the
way the database is used.
Writing to the Database When a Node Is Down
Imagine you have a database with three replicas, and one of the replicas is currently
unavailable—perhaps it is being rebooted to install a system update. In a leader-based
Leaderless Replication | 177

configuration, if you want to continue processing writes, you may need to perform a
failover (see “Handling Node Outages” on page 156 ).
On the other hand, in a leaderless configuration, failover does not exist. Figure 5-10
shows what happens: the client (user 1234) sends the write to all three replicas in par‐
allel, and the two available replicas accept the write but the unavailable replica misses
it. Let’s say that it’s sufficient for two out of three replicas to acknowledge the write:
after user 1234 has received two ok responses, we consider the write to be successful.
The client simply ignores the fact that one of the replicas missed the write.
Figure 5-10. A quorum write, quorum read, and read repair after a node outage.
Now imagine that the unavailable node comes back online, and clients start reading
from it. Any writes that happened while the node was down are missing from that
node. Thus, if you read from that node, you may get stale (outdated) values as
responses.
To solve that problem, when a client reads from the database, it doesn’t just send its
request to one replica: read requests are also sent to several nodes in parallel . The cli‐
ent may get different responses from different nodes; i.e., the up-to-date value from
one node and a stale value from another. Version numbers are used to determine
which value is newer (see “Detecting Concurrent Writes” on page 184 ).
Read repair and anti-entropy
The replication scheme should ensure that eventually all the data is copied to every
replica. After an unavailable node comes back online, how does it catch up on the
writes that it missed?
178 | Chapter 5: Replication

vii. Sometimes this kind of quorum is called a strict quorum, to contrast with sloppy quorums (discussed in
“Sloppy Quorums and Hinted Handoff” on page 183 ).
Two mechanisms are often used in Dynamo-style datastores:
Read repair
When a client makes a read from several nodes in parallel, it can detect any stale
responses. For example, in Figure 5-10, user 2345 gets a version 6 value from rep‐
lica 3 and a version 7 value from replicas 1 and 2. The client sees that replica 3
has a stale value and writes the newer value back to that replica. This approach
works well for values that are frequently read.
Anti-entropy process
In addition, some datastores have a background process that constantly looks for
differences in the data between replicas and copies any missing data from one
replica to another. Unlike the replication log in leader-based replication, this
anti-entropy process does not copy writes in any particular order, and there may
be a significant delay before data is copied.
Not all systems implement both of these; for example, Voldemort currently does not
have an anti-entropy process. Note that without an anti-entropy process, values that
are rarely read may be missing from some replicas and thus have reduced durability,
because read repair is only performed when a value is read by the application.
Quorums for reading and writing
In the example of Figure 5-10, we considered the write to be successful even though it
was only processed on two out of three replicas. What if only one out of three replicas
accepted the write? How far can we push this?
If we know that every successful write is guaranteed to be present on at least two out
of three replicas, that means at most one replica can be stale. Thus, if we read from at
least two replicas, we can be sure that at least one of the two is up to date. If the third
replica is down or slow to respond, reads can nevertheless continue returning an up-
to-date value.
More generally, if there are n replicas, every write must be confirmed by w nodes to
be considered successful, and we must query at least r nodes for each read. (In our
example, n = 3, w = 2, r = 2.) As long as w + r > n, we expect to get an up-to-date
value when reading, because at least one of the r nodes we’re reading from must be
up to date. Reads and writes that obey these r and w values are called quorum reads
and writes [44].vii You can think of r and w as the minimum number of votes required
for the read or write to be valid.
Leaderless Replication | 179

In Dynamo-style databases, the parameters n, w, and r are typically configurable. A
common choice is to make n an odd number (typically 3 or 5) and to set w = r =
(n + 1) / 2 (rounded up). However, you can vary the numbers as you see fit. For
example, a workload with few writes and many reads may benefit from setting w = n
and r = 1. This makes reads faster, but has the disadvantage that just one failed node
causes all database writes to fail.
There may be more than n nodes in the cluster, but any given value
is stored only on n nodes. This allows the dataset to be partitioned,
supporting datasets that are larger than you can fit on one node.
We will return to partitioning in Chapter 6.
The quorum condition, w + r > n, allows the system to tolerate unavailable nodes as
follows:
• If w < n, we can still process writes if a node is unavailable.
• If r < n, we can still process reads if a node is unavailable.
• With n = 3, w = 2, r = 2 we can tolerate one unavailable node.
• With n = 5, w = 3, r = 3 we can tolerate two unavailable nodes. This case is illus‐
trated in Figure 5-11.
• Normally, reads and writes are always sent to all n replicas in parallel. The
parameters w and r determine how many nodes we wait for—i.e., how many of
the n nodes need to report success before we consider the read or write to be suc‐
cessful.
Figure 5-11. If w + r > n, at least one of the r replicas you read from must have seen the
most recent successful write.
180 | Chapter 5: Replication