If fewer than the required w or r nodes are available, writes or reads return an error.
A node could be unavailable for many reasons: because the node is down (crashed,
powered down), due to an error executing the operation (can’t write because the disk
is full), due to a network interruption between the client and the node, or for any
number of other reasons. We only care whether the node returned a successful
response and don’t need to distinguish between different kinds of fault.
Limitations of Quorum Consistency
If you have n replicas, and you choose w and r such that w + r > n, you can generally
expect every read to return the most recent value written for a key. This is the case
because the set of nodes to which you’ve written and the set of nodes from which
you’ve read must overlap. That is, among the nodes you read there must be at least
one node with the latest value (illustrated in Figure 5-11).
Often, r and w are chosen to be a majority (more than n/2) of nodes, because that
ensures w + r > n while still tolerating up to n/2 node failures. But quorums are not
necessarily majorities—it only matters that the sets of nodes used by the read and
write operations overlap in at least one node. Other quorum assignments are possi‐
ble, which allows some flexibility in the design of distributed algorithms [45].
You may also set w and r to smaller numbers, so that w + r ≤ n (i.e., the quorum con‐
dition is not satisfied). In this case, reads and writes will still be sent to n nodes, but a
smaller number of successful responses is required for the operation to succeed.
With a smaller w and r you are more likely to read stale values, because it’s more
likely that your read didn’t include the node with the latest value. On the upside, this
configuration allows lower latency and higher availability: if there is a network inter‐
ruption and many replicas become unreachable, there’s a higher chance that you can
continue processing reads and writes. Only after the number of reachable replicas
falls below w or r does the database become unavailable for writing or reading,
respectively.
However, even with w + r > n, there are likely to be edge cases where stale values are
returned. These depend on the implementation, but possible scenarios include:
• If a sloppy quorum is used (see “Sloppy Quorums and Hinted Handoff”  on page
183), the w writes may end up on different nodes than the r reads, so there is no
longer a guaranteed overlap between the r nodes and the w nodes [46].
• If two writes occur concurrently, it is not clear which one happened first. In this
case, the only safe solution is to merge the concurrent writes (see “Handling
Write Conflicts” on page 171). If a winner is picked based on a timestamp (last
write wins), writes can be lost due to clock skew [ 35]. We will return to this topic
in “Detecting Concurrent Writes” on page 184 .
Leaderless Replication | 181

• If a write happens concurrently with a read, the write may be reflected on only
some of the replicas. In this case, it’s undetermined whether the read returns the
old or the new value.
• If a write succeeded on some replicas but failed on others (for example because
the disks on some nodes are full), and overall succeeded on fewer than w replicas,
it is not rolled back on the replicas where it succeeded. This means that if a write
was reported as failed, subsequent reads may or may not return the value from
that write [47].
• If a node carrying a new value fails, and its data is restored from a replica carry‐
ing an old value, the number of replicas storing the new value may fall below w,
breaking the quorum condition.
• Even if everything is working correctly, there are edge cases in which you can get
unlucky with the timing, as we shall see in “Linearizability and quorums” on
page 334.
Thus, although quorums appear to guarantee that a read returns the latest written
value, in practice it is not so simple. Dynamo-style databases are generally optimized
for use cases that can tolerate eventual consistency. The parameters w and r allow you
to adjust the probability of stale values being read, but it’s wise to not take them as
absolute guarantees.
In particular, you usually do not get the guarantees discussed in “Problems with Rep‐
lication Lag” on page 161 (reading your writes, monotonic reads, or consistent prefix
reads), so the previously mentioned anomalies can occur in applications. Stronger
guarantees generally require transactions or consensus. We will return to these topics
in Chapter 7 and Chapter 9. 
Monitoring staleness
From an operational perspective, it’s important to monitor whether your databases
are returning up-to-date results. Even if your application can tolerate stale reads, you
need to be aware of the health of your replication. If it falls behind significantly, it
should alert you so that you can investigate the cause (for example, a problem in the
network or an overloaded node).
For leader-based replication, the database typically exposes metrics for the replication
lag, which you can feed into a monitoring system. This is possible because writes are
applied to the leader and to followers in the same order, and each node has a position
in the replication log (the number of writes it has applied locally). By subtracting a
follower’s current position from the leader’s current position, you can measure the
amount of replication lag.
However, in systems with leaderless replication, there is no fixed order in which
writes are applied, which makes monitoring more difficult. Moreover, if the database
182 | Chapter 5: Replication

only uses read repair (no anti-entropy), there is no limit to how old a value might be
—if a value is only infrequently read, the value returned by a stale replica may be
ancient.
There has been some research on measuring replica staleness in databases with lead‐
erless replication and predicting the expected percentage of stale reads depending on
the parameters n, w, and r [48]. This is unfortunately not yet common practice, but it
would be good to include staleness measurements in the standard set of metrics for
databases. Eventual consistency is a deliberately vague guarantee, but for operability
it’s important to be able to quantify “eventual.” 
Sloppy Quorums and Hinted Handoff
Databases with appropriately configured quorums can tolerate the failure of individ‐
ual nodes without the need for failover. They can also tolerate individual nodes going
slow, because requests don’t have to wait for all n nodes to respond—they can return
when w or r nodes have responded. These characteristics make databases with leader‐
less replication appealing for use cases that require high availability and low latency,
and that can tolerate occasional stale reads.
However, quorums (as described so far) are not as fault-tolerant as they could be. A
network interruption can easily cut off a client from a large number of database
nodes. Although those nodes are alive, and other clients may be able to connect to
them, to a client that is cut off from the database nodes, they might as well be dead. In
this situation, it’s likely that fewer than w or r reachable nodes remain, so the client
can no longer reach a quorum.
In a large cluster (with significantly more than n nodes) it’s likely that the client can
connect to some database nodes during the network interruption, just not to the
nodes that it needs to assemble a quorum for a particular value. In that case, database
designers face a trade-off:
• Is it better to return errors to all requests for which we cannot reach a quorum of
w or r nodes?
• Or should we accept writes anyway, and write them to some nodes that are
reachable but aren’t among the n nodes on which the value usually lives?
The latter is known as a sloppy quorum  [37]: writes and reads still require w and r
successful responses, but those may include nodes that are not among the designated
n “home” nodes for a value. By analogy, if you lock yourself out of your house, you
may knock on the neighbor’s door and ask whether you may stay on their couch tem‐
porarily.
Once the network interruption is fixed, any writes that one node temporarily
accepted on behalf of another node are sent to the appropriate “home” nodes. This is
Leaderless Replication | 183

called hinted handoff . (Once you find the keys to your house again, your neighbor
politely asks you to get off their couch and go home.)
Sloppy quorums are particularly useful for increasing write availability: as long as any
w nodes are available, the database can accept writes. However, this means that even
when w + r > n, you cannot be sure to read the latest value for a key, because the
latest value may have been temporarily written to some nodes outside of n [47].
Thus, a sloppy quorum actually isn’t a quorum at all in the traditional sense. It’s only
an assurance of durability, namely that the data is stored on w nodes somewhere.
There is no guarantee that a read of r nodes will see it until the hinted handoff has
completed.
Sloppy quorums are optional in all common Dynamo implementations. In Riak they
are enabled by default, and in Cassandra and Voldemort they are disabled by default
[46, 49, 50].
Multi-datacenter operation
We previously discussed cross-datacenter replication as a use case for multi-leader
replication (see “Multi-Leader Replication” on page 168). Leaderless replication is
also suitable for multi-datacenter operation, since it is designed to tolerate conflicting
concurrent writes, network interruptions, and latency spikes.
Cassandra and Voldemort implement their multi-datacenter support within the nor‐
mal leaderless model: the number of replicas n includes nodes in all datacenters, and
in the configuration you can specify how many of the n replicas you want to have in
each datacenter. Each write from a client is sent to all replicas, regardless of datacen‐
ter, but the client usually only waits for acknowledgment from a quorum of nodes
within its local datacenter so that it is unaffected by delays and interruptions on the
cross-datacenter link. The higher-latency writes to other datacenters are often config‐
ured to happen asynchronously, although there is some flexibility in the configura‐
tion [50, 51].
Riak keeps all communication between clients and database nodes local to one data‐
center, so n describes the number of replicas within one datacenter. Cross-datacenter
replication between database clusters happens asynchronously in the background, in
a style that is similar to multi-leader replication [52].
Detecting Concurrent Writes
Dynamo-style databases allow several clients to concurrently write to the same key,
which means that conflicts will occur even if strict quorums are used. The situation is
similar to multi-leader replication (see “Handling Write Conflicts” on page 171),
although in Dynamo-style databases conflicts can also arise during read repair or
hinted handoff.
184 | Chapter 5: Replication

The problem is that events may arrive in a different order at different nodes, due to
variable network delays and partial failures. For example, Figure 5-12 shows two cli‐
ents, A and B, simultaneously writing to a key X in a three-node datastore:
• Node 1 receives the write from A, but never receives the write from B due to a
transient outage.
• Node 2 first receives the write from A, then the write from B.
• Node 3 first receives the write from B, then the write from A.
Figure 5-12. Concurrent writes in a Dynamo-style datastore: there is no well-defined
ordering.
If each node simply overwrote the value for a key whenever it received a write request
from a client, the nodes would become permanently inconsistent, as shown by the
final get request in Figure 5-12: node 2 thinks that the final value of X is B, whereas
the other nodes think that the value is A.
In order to become eventually consistent, the replicas should converge toward the
same value. How do they do that? One might hope that replicated databases would
handle this automatically, but unfortunately most implementations are quite poor: if
you want to avoid losing data, you—the application developer—need to know a lot
about the internals of your database’s conflict handling.
We briefly touched on some techniques for conflict resolution in “Handling Write
Conflicts” on page 171. Before we wrap up this chapter, let’s explore the issue in a bit
more detail.
Leaderless Replication | 185

Last write wins (discarding concurrent writes)
One approach for achieving eventual convergence is to declare that each replica need
only store the most “recent” value and allow “older” values to be overwritten and dis‐
carded. Then, as long as we have some way of unambiguously determining which
write is more “recent,” and every write is eventually copied to every replica, the repli‐
cas will eventually converge to the same value.
As indicated by the quotes around “recent,” this idea is actually quite misleading. In
the example of Figure 5-12, neither client knew about the other one when it sent its
write requests to the database nodes, so it’s not clear which one happened first. In
fact, it doesn’t really make sense to say that either happened “first”: we say the writes
are concurrent, so their order is undefined.
Even though the writes don’t have a natural ordering, we can force an arbitrary order
on them. For example, we can attach a timestamp to each write, pick the biggest
timestamp as the most “recent,” and discard any writes with an earlier timestamp.
This conflict resolution algorithm, called last write wins  (LWW), is the only sup‐
ported conflict resolution method in Cassandra [ 53], and an optional feature in Riak
[35].
LWW achieves the goal of eventual convergence, but at the cost of durability: if there
are several concurrent writes to the same key, even if they were all reported as suc‐
cessful to the client (because they were written to w replicas), only one of the writes
will survive and the others will be silently discarded. Moreover, LWW may even drop
writes that are not concurrent, as we shall discuss in “Timestamps for ordering
events” on page 291 .
There are some situations, such as caching, in which lost writes are perhaps accepta‐
ble. If losing data is not acceptable, LWW is a poor choice for conflict resolution.
The only safe way of using a database with LWW is to ensure that a key is only writ‐
ten once and thereafter treated as immutable, thus avoiding any concurrent updates
to the same key. For example, a recommended way of using Cassandra is to use a
UUID as the key, thus giving each write operation a unique key [53].
The “happens-before” relationship and concurrency
How do we decide whether two operations are concurrent or not? To develop an
intuition, let’s look at some examples:
• In Figure 5-9 , the two writes are not concurrent: A’s insert happens before  B’s
increment, because the value incremented by B is the value inserted by A. In
other words, B’s operation builds upon A’s operation, so B’s operation must have
happened later. We also say that B is causally dependent on A.
186 | Chapter 5: Replication

• On the other hand, the two writes in Figure 5-12 are concurrent: when each cli‐
ent starts the operation, it does not know that another client is also performing
an operation on the same key. Thus, there is no causal dependency between the
operations.
An operation A happens before another operation B if B knows about A, or depends
on A, or builds upon A in some way. Whether one operation happens before another
operation is the key to defining what concurrency means. In fact, we can simply say
that two operations are concurrent if neither happens before the other (i.e., neither
knows about the other) [54].
Thus, whenever you have two operations A and B, there are three possibilities: either
A happened before B, or B happened before A, or A and B are concurrent. What we
need is an algorithm to tell us whether two operations are concurrent or not. If one
operation happened before another, the later operation should overwrite the earlier
operation, but if the operations are concurrent, we have a conflict that needs to be
resolved.
Concurrency, Time, and Relativity
It may seem that two operations should be called concurrent if they occur “at the
same time”—but in fact, it is not important whether they literally overlap in time.
Because of problems with clocks in distributed systems, it is actually quite difficult to
tell whether two things happened at exactly the same time—an issue we will discuss
in more detail in Chapter 8.
For defining concurrency, exact time doesn’t matter: we simply call two operations
concurrent if they are both unaware of each other, regardless of the physical time at
which they occurred. People sometimes make a connection between this principle
and the special theory of relativity in physics [ 54], which introduced the idea that
information cannot travel faster than the speed of light. Consequently, two events
that occur some distance apart cannot possibly affect each other if the time between
the events is shorter than the time it takes light to travel the distance between them.
In computer systems, two operations might be concurrent even though the speed of
light would in principle have allowed one operation to affect the other. For example,
if the network was slow or interrupted at the time, two operations can occur some
time apart and still be concurrent, because the network problems prevented one
operation from being able to know about the other.
Capturing the happens-before relationship
Let’s look at an algorithm that determines whether two operations are concurrent, or
whether one happened before another. To keep things simple, let’s start with a data‐
Leaderless Replication | 187

base that has only one replica. Once we have worked out how to do this on a single
replica, we can generalize the approach to a leaderless database with multiple replicas.
Figure 5-13 shows two clients concurrently adding items to the same shopping cart.
(If that example strikes you as too inane, imagine instead two air traffic controllers
concurrently adding aircraft to the sector they are tracking.) Initially, the cart is
empty. Between them, the clients make five writes to the database:
1. Client 1 adds milk to the cart. This is the first write to that key, so the server suc‐
cessfully stores it and assigns it version 1. The server also echoes the value back
to the client, along with the version number.
2. Client 2 adds eggs to the cart, not knowing that client 1 concurrently added milk
(client 2 thought that its eggs were the only item in the cart). The server assigns
version 2 to this write, and stores eggs and milk as two separate values. It then
returns both values to the client, along with the version number of 2.
3. Client 1, oblivious to client 2’s write, wants to add flour to the cart, so it thinks
the current cart contents should be [milk, flour] . It sends this value to the
server, along with the version number 1 that the server gave client 1 previously.
The server can tell from the version number that the write of [milk, flour]
supersedes the prior value of [milk] but that it is concurrent with [eggs]. Thus,
the server assigns version 3 to [milk, flour] , overwrites the version 1 value
[milk], but keeps the version 2 value [eggs] and returns both remaining values
to the client.
4. Meanwhile, client 2 wants to add ham to the cart, unaware that client 1 just added
flour. Client 2 received the two values [milk] and [eggs] from the server in the
last response, so the client now merges those values and adds ham to form a new
value, [eggs, milk, ham]. It sends that value to the server, along with the previ‐
ous version number 2. The server detects that version 2 overwrites [eggs] but is
concurrent with [milk, flour], so the two remaining values are [milk, flour]
with version 3, and [eggs, milk, ham] with version 4.
5. Finally, client 1 wants to add bacon. It previously received [milk, flour] and
[eggs] from the server at version 3, so it merges those, adds bacon, and sends the
final value [milk, flour, eggs, bacon]  to the server, along with the version
number 3. This overwrites [milk, flour] (note that [eggs] was already over‐
written in the last step) but is concurrent with [eggs, milk, ham], so the server
keeps those two concurrent values.
188 | Chapter 5: Replication

Figure 5-13. Capturing causal dependencies between two clients concurrently editing a
shopping cart.
The dataflow between the operations in Figure 5-13  is illustrated graphically in
Figure 5-14. The arrows indicate which operation happened before which other oper‐
ation, in the sense that the later operation knew about or depended on the earlier one.
In this example, the clients are never fully up to date with the data on the server, since
there is always another operation going on concurrently. But old versions of the value
do get overwritten eventually, and no writes are lost.
Figure 5-14. Graph of causal dependencies in Figure 5-13.
Note that the server can determine whether two operations are concurrent by looking
at the version numbers—it does not need to interpret the value itself (so the value
could be any data structure). The algorithm works as follows:
Leaderless Replication | 189

• The server maintains a version number for every key, increments the version
number every time that key is written, and stores the new version number along
with the value written.
• When a client reads a key, the server returns all values that have not been over‐
written, as well as the latest version number. A client must read a key before
writing.
• When a client writes a key, it must include the version number from the prior
read, and it must merge together all values that it received in the prior read. (The
response from a write request can be like a read, returning all current values,
which allows us to chain several writes like in the shopping cart example.)
• When the server receives a write with a particular version number, it can over‐
write all values with that version number or below (since it knows that they have
been merged into the new value), but it must keep all values with a higher ver‐
sion number (because those values are concurrent with the incoming write).
When a write includes the version number from a prior read, that tells us which pre‐
vious state the write is based on. If you make a write without including a version
number, it is concurrent with all other writes, so it will not overwrite anything—it
will just be returned as one of the values on subsequent reads.
Merging concurrently written values
This algorithm ensures that no data is silently dropped, but it unfortunately requires
that the clients do some extra work: if several operations happen concurrently, clients
have to clean up afterward by merging the concurrently written values. Riak calls
these concurrent values siblings.
Merging sibling values is essentially the same problem as conflict resolution in multi-
leader replication, which we discussed previously (see “Handling Write Conflicts”  on
page 171). A simple approach is to just pick one of the values based on a version
number or timestamp (last write wins), but that implies losing data. So, you may
need to do something more intelligent in application code.
With the example of a shopping cart, a reasonable approach to merging siblings is to
just take the union. In Figure 5-14, the two final siblings are [milk, flour, eggs,
bacon] and [eggs, milk, ham] ; note that milk and eggs appear in both, even
though they were each only written once. The merged value might be something like
[milk, flour, eggs, bacon, ham], without duplicates.
However, if you want to allow people to also remove things from their carts, and not
just add things, then taking the union of siblings may not yield the right result: if you
merge two sibling carts and an item has been removed in only one of them, then the
removed item will reappear in the union of the siblings [ 37]. To prevent this prob‐
190 | Chapter 5: Replication

lem, an item cannot simply be deleted from the database when it is removed; instead,
the system must leave a marker with an appropriate version number to indicate that
the item has been removed when merging siblings. Such a deletion marker is known
as a tombstone. (We previously saw tombstones in the context of log compaction in
“Hash Indexes” on page 72 .)
As merging siblings in application code is complex and error-prone, there are some
efforts to design data structures that can perform this merging automatically, as dis‐
cussed in “Automatic Conflict Resolution”  on page 174. For example, Riak’s datatype
support uses a family of data structures called CRDTs [ 38, 39, 55] that can automati‐
cally merge siblings in sensible ways, including preserving deletions.
Version vectors
The example in Figure 5-13  used only a single replica. How does the algorithm
change when there are multiple replicas, but no leader?
Figure 5-13  uses a single version number to capture dependencies between opera‐
tions, but that is not sufficient when there are multiple replicas accepting writes con‐
currently. Instead, we need to use a version number per replica  as well as per key.
Each replica increments its own version number when processing a write, and also
keeps track of the version numbers it has seen from each of the other replicas. This
information indicates which values to overwrite and which values to keep as siblings.
The collection of version numbers from all the replicas is called a version vector [56].
A few variants of this idea are in use, but the most interesting is probably the dotted
version vector [57], which is used in Riak 2.0 [ 58, 59]. We won’t go into the details,
but the way it works is quite similar to what we saw in our cart example.
Like the version numbers in Figure 5-13, version vectors are sent from the database
replicas to clients when values are read, and need to be sent back to the database
when a value is subsequently written. (Riak encodes the version vector as a string that
it calls causal context.) The version vector allows the database to distinguish between
overwrites and concurrent writes.
Also, like in the single-replica example, the application may need to merge siblings.
The version vector structure ensures that it is safe to read from one replica and subse‐
quently write back to another replica. Doing so may result in siblings being created,
but no data is lost as long as siblings are merged correctly.
Version vectors and vector clocks
A version vector is sometimes also called a vector clock, even though
they are not quite the same. The difference is subtle—please see the
references for details [ 57, 60, 61]. In brief, when comparing the
state of replicas, version vectors are the right data structure to use. 
Leaderless Replication | 191

Summary
In this chapter we looked at the issue of replication. Replication can serve several
purposes:
High availability
Keeping the system running, even when one machine (or several machines, or an
entire datacenter) goes down
Disconnected operation
Allowing an application to continue working when there is a network interrup‐
tion
Latency
Placing data geographically close to users, so that users can interact with it faster
Scalability
Being able to handle a higher volume of reads than a single machine could han‐
dle, by performing reads on replicas
Despite being a simple goal—keeping a copy of the same data on several machines—
replication turns out to be a remarkably tricky problem. It requires carefully thinking
about concurrency and about all the things that can go wrong, and dealing with the
consequences of those faults. At a minimum, we need to deal with unavailable nodes
and network interruptions (and that’s not even considering the more insidious kinds
of fault, such as silent data corruption due to software bugs).
We discussed three main approaches to replication:
Single-leader replication
Clients send all writes to a single node (the leader), which sends a stream of data
change events to the other replicas (followers). Reads can be performed on any
replica, but reads from followers might be stale.
Multi-leader replication
Clients send each write to one of several leader nodes, any of which can accept
writes. The leaders send streams of data change events to each other and to any
follower nodes.
Leaderless replication
Clients send each write to several nodes, and read from several nodes in parallel
in order to detect and correct nodes with stale data.
Each approach has advantages and disadvantages. Single-leader replication is popular
because it is fairly easy to understand and there is no conflict resolution to worry
about. Multi-leader and leaderless replication can be more robust in the presence of
192 | Chapter 5: Replication

faulty nodes, network interruptions, and latency spikes—at the cost of being harder
to reason about and providing only very weak consistency guarantees.
Replication can be synchronous or asynchronous, which has a profound effect on the
system behavior when there is a fault. Although asynchronous replication can be fast
when the system is running smoothly, it’s important to figure out what happens
when replication lag increases and servers fail. If a leader fails and you promote an
asynchronously updated follower to be the new leader, recently committed data may
be lost.
We looked at some strange effects that can be caused by replication lag, and we dis‐
cussed a few consistency models which are helpful for deciding how an application
should behave under replication lag:
Read-after-write consistency
Users should always see data that they submitted themselves.
Monotonic reads
After users have seen the data at one point in time, they shouldn’t later see the
data from some earlier point in time.
Consistent prefix reads
Users should see the data in a state that makes causal sense: for example, seeing a
question and its reply in the correct order.
Finally, we discussed the concurrency issues that are inherent in multi-leader and
leaderless replication approaches: because they allow multiple writes to happen con‐
currently, conflicts may occur. We examined an algorithm that a database might use
to determine whether one operation happened before another, or whether they hap‐
pened concurrently. We also touched on methods for resolving conflicts by merging
together concurrent updates.
In the next chapter we will continue looking at data that is distributed across multiple
machines, through the counterpart of replication: splitting a large dataset into parti‐
tions. 
References
[1] Bruce G. Lindsay, Patricia Griffiths Selinger, C. Galtieri, et al.: “ Notes on Dis‐
tributed Databases,” IBM Research, Research Report RJ2571(33471), July 1979.
[2] “ Oracle Active Data Guard Real-Time Data Protection and Availability ,” Oracle
White Paper, June 2013.
[3] “ AlwaysOn Availability Groups,” in SQL Server Books Online, Microsoft, 2012.
Summary | 193

[4] Lin Qiao, Kapil Surlaker, Shirshanka Das, et al.: “ On Brewing Fresh Espresso:
LinkedIn’s Distributed Data Serving Platform ,” at ACM International Conference on
Management of Data (SIGMOD), June 2013.
[5] Jun Rao: “ Intra-Cluster Replication for Apache Kafka ,” at ApacheCon North
America, February 2013.
[6] “ Highly Available Queues,” in RabbitMQ Server Documentation, Pivotal Software,
Inc., 2014.
[7] Yoshinori Matsunobu: “ Semi-Synchronous Replication at Facebook ,” yoshinori‐
matsunobu.blogspot.co.uk, April 1, 2014.
[8] Robbert van Renesse and Fred B. Schneider: “ Chain Replication for Supporting
High Throughput and Availability ,” at 6th USENIX Symposium on Operating System
Design and Implementation (OSDI), December 2004.
[9] Jeff Terrace and Michael J. Freedman: “ Object Storage on CRAQ: High-
Throughput Chain Replication for Read-Mostly Workloads ,” at USENIX Annual
Technical Conference (ATC), June 2009.
[10] Brad Calder, Ju Wang, Aaron Ogus, et al.: “ Windows Azure Storage: A Highly
Available Cloud Storage Service with Strong Consistency ,” at 23rd ACM Symposium
on Operating Systems Principles (SOSP), October 2011.
[11] Andrew Wang: “ Windows Azure Storage,” umbrant.com, February 4, 2016.
[12] “ Percona Xtrabackup - Documentation,” Percona LLC, 2014.
[13] Jesse Newland: “ GitHub Availability This Week ,” github.com, September 14,
2012.
[14] Mark Imbriaco: “ Downtime Last Saturday,” github.com, December 26, 2012.
[15] John Hugg: “ ‘All in’ with Determinism for Performance and Testing in Dis‐
tributed Systems,” at Strange Loop, September 2015.
[16] Amit Kapila: “ WAL Internals of PostgreSQL ,” at PostgreSQL Conference
(PGCon), May 2012.
[17] MySQL Internals Manual. Oracle, 2014.
[18] Yogeshwer Sharma, Philippe Ajoux, Petchean Ang, et al.: “ Wormhole: Reliable
Pub-Sub to Support Geo-Replicated Internet Services ,” at 12th USENIX Symposium
on Networked Systems Design and Implementation (NSDI), May 2015.
[19] “ Oracle GoldenGate 12c: Real-Time Access to Real-Time Information ,” Oracle
White Paper, October 2013.
[20] Shirshanka Das, Chavdar Botev, Kapil Surlaker, et al.: “ All Aboard the Data‐
bus!,” at ACM Symposium on Cloud Computing (SoCC), October 2012.
194 | Chapter 5: Replication

[21] Greg Sabino Mullane: “ Version 5 of Bucardo Database Replication System ,”
blog.endpoint.com, June 23, 2014.
[22] Werner Vogels: “ Eventually Consistent ,” ACM Queue , volume 6, number 6,
pages 14–19, October 2008. doi:10.1145/1466443.1466448
[23] Douglas B. Terry: “ Replicated Data Consistency Explained Through Baseball ,”
Microsoft Research, Technical Report MSR-TR-2011-137, October 2011.
[24] Douglas B. Terry, Alan J. Demers, Karin Petersen, et al.: “ Session Guarantees for
Weakly Consistent Replicated Data ,” at 3rd International Conference on Parallel and
Distributed Information Systems  (PDIS), September 1994. doi:10.1109/PDIS.
1994.331722
[25] Terry Pratchett: Reaper Man: A Discworld Novel . Victor Gollancz, 1991. ISBN:
978-0-575-04979-6
[26] “ Tungsten Replicator,” Continuent, Inc., 2014.
[27] “ BDR 0.10.0 Documentation ,” The PostgreSQL Global Development Group,
bdr-project.org, 2015.
[28] Robert Hodges: “ If You *Must* Deploy Multi-Master Replication, Read This
First,” scale-out-blog.blogspot.co.uk, March 30, 2012.
[29] J. Chris Anderson, Jan Lehnardt, and Noah Slater: CouchDB: The Definitive
Guide. O’Reilly Media, 2010. ISBN: 978-0-596-15589-6
[30] AppJet, Inc.: “ Etherpad and EasySync Technical Manual,” github.com, March 26,
2011.
[31] John Day-Richter: “ What’s Different About the New Google Docs: Making Col‐
laboration Fast,” googledrive.blogspot.com, 23 September 2010.
[32] Martin Kleppmann and Alastair R. Beresford: “ A Conflict-Free Replicated JSON
Datatype,” arXiv:1608.03960, August 13, 2016.
[33] Frazer Clement: “ Eventual Consistency – Detecting Conflicts ,” messagepass‐
ing.blogspot.co.uk, October 20, 2011.
[34] Robert Hodges: “ State of the Art for MySQL Multi-Master Replication ,” at Per‐
cona Live: MySQL Conference & Expo, April 2013.
[35] John Daily: “ Clocks Are Bad, or, Welcome to the Wonderful World of Dis‐
tributed Systems,” basho.com, November 12, 2013.
[36] Riley Berton: “ Is Bi-Directional Replication (BDR) in Postgres Transactional? ,”
sdf.org, January 4, 2016.
Summary | 195

[37] Giuseppe DeCandia, Deniz Hastorun, Madan Jampani, et al.: “ Dynamo: Ama‐
zon’s Highly Available Key-Value Store ,” at 21st ACM Symposium on Operating Sys‐
tems Principles (SOSP), October 2007.
[38] Marc Shapiro, Nuno Preguiça, Carlos Baquero, and Marek Zawirski: “ A Com‐
prehensive Study of Convergent and Commutative Replicated Data Types ,” INRIA
Research Report no. 7506, January 2011.
[39] Sam Elliott: “ CRDTs: An UPDATE (or Maybe Just a PUT) ,” at RICON West ,
October 2013.
[40] Russell Brown: “ A Bluffers Guide to CRDTs in Riak ,” gist.github.com, October
28, 2013.
[41] Benjamin Farinier, Thomas Gazagnaire, and Anil Madhavapeddy: “ Mergeable
Persistent Data Structures ,” at 26es Journées Francophones des Langages Applicatifs
(JFLA), January 2015.
[42] Chengzheng Sun and Clarence Ellis: “ Operational Transformation in Real-Time
Group Editors: Issues, Algorithms, and Achievements ,” at ACM Conference on Com‐
puter Supported Cooperative Work (CSCW), November 1998.
[43] Lars Hofhansl: “ HBASE-7709: Infinite Loop Possible in Master/Master Replica‐
tion,” issues.apache.org, January 29, 2013.
[44] David K. Gifford: “ Weighted Voting for Replicated Data ,” at 7th ACM Sympo‐
sium on Operating Systems Principles  (SOSP), December 1979. doi:
10.1145/800215.806583
[45] Heidi Howard, Dahlia Malkhi, and Alexander Spiegelman: “ Flexible Paxos: Quo‐
rum Intersection Revisited,” arXiv:1608.06696, August 24, 2016.
[46] Joseph Blomstedt: “ Re: Absolute Consistency ,” email to riak-users mailing list,
lists.basho.com, January 11, 2012.
[47] Joseph Blomstedt: “ Bringing Consistency to Riak ,” at RICON West , October
2012.
[48] Peter Bailis, Shivaram Venkataraman, Michael J. Franklin, et al.: “ Quantifying
Eventual Consistency with PBS,” Communications of the ACM, volume 57, number 8,
pages 93–102, August 2014. doi:10.1145/2632792
[49] Jonathan Ellis: “ Modern Hinted Handoff,” datastax.com, December 11, 2012.
[50] “ Project Voldemort Wiki,” github.com, 2013.
[51] “ Apache Cassandra 2.0 Documentation,” DataStax, Inc., 2014.
[52] “ Riak Enterprise: Multi-Datacenter Replication .” Technical whitepaper, Basho
Technologies, Inc., September 2014.
196 | Chapter 5: Replication

[53] Jonathan Ellis: “ Why Cassandra Doesn’t Need Vector Clocks ,” datastax.com,
September 2, 2013.
[54] Leslie Lamport: “ Time, Clocks, and the Ordering of Events in a Distributed Sys‐
tem,” Communications of the ACM , volume 21, number 7, pages 558–565, July 1978.
doi:10.1145/359545.359563
[55] Joel Jacobson: “ Riak 2.0: Data Types,” blog.joeljacobson.com, March 23, 2014.
[56] D. Stott Parker Jr., Gerald J. Popek, Gerard Rudisin, et al.: “ Detection of Mutual
Inconsistency in Distributed Systems ,” IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering ,
volume 9, number 3, pages 240–247, May 1983. doi:10.1109/TSE.1983.236733
[57] Nuno Preguiça, Carlos Baquero, Paulo Sérgio Almeida, et al.: “ Dotted Version
Vectors: Logical Clocks for Optimistic Replication ,” arXiv:1011.5808, November 26,
2010.
[58] Sean Cribbs: “ A Brief History of Time in Riak,” at RICON, October 2014.
[59] Russell Brown: “ Vector Clocks Revisited Part 2: Dotted Version Vectors ,”
basho.com, November 10, 2015.
[60] Carlos Baquero: “ Version Vectors Are Not Vector Clocks ,” haslab.word‐
press.com, July 8, 2011.
[61] Reinhard Schwarz and Friedemann Mattern: “ Detecting Causal Relationships in
Distributed Computations: In Search of the Holy Grail ,” Distributed Computing, vol‐
ume 7, number 3, pages 149–174, March 1994. doi:10.1007/BF02277859
Summary | 197

i. Partitioning, as discussed in this chapter, is a way of intentionally breaking a large database down into
smaller ones. It has nothing to do with network partitions (netsplits), a type of fault in the network between
nodes. We will discuss such faults in Chapter 8.
CHAPTER 6
Partitioning
Clearly, we must break away from the sequential and not limit the computers. We must
state definitions and provide for priorities and descriptions of data. We must state relation‐
ships, not procedures.
—Grace Murray Hopper, Management and the Computer of the Future (1962)
In Chapter 5  we discussed replication—that is, having multiple copies of the same
data on different nodes. For very large datasets, or very high query throughput, that is
not sufficient: we need to break the data up into partitions, also known as sharding.i
Terminological confusion
What we call a partition here is called a shard in MongoDB, Elas‐
ticsearch, and SolrCloud; it’s known as a region in HBase, a tablet
in Bigtable, a vnode in Cassandra and Riak, and a vBucket in
Couchbase. However, partitioning is the most established term, so
we’ll stick with that.
Normally, partitions are defined in such a way that each piece of data (each record,
row, or document) belongs to exactly one partition. There are various ways of achiev‐
ing this, which we discuss in depth in this chapter. In effect, each partition is a small
database of its own, although the database may support operations that touch multi‐
ple partitions at the same time.
The main reason for wanting to partition data is scalability. Different partitions can
be placed on different nodes in a shared-nothing cluster (see the introduction to
199

Part II  for a definition of shared nothing ). Thus, a large dataset can be distributed
across many disks, and the query load can be distributed across many processors.
For queries that operate on a single partition, each node can independently execute
the queries for its own partition, so query throughput can be scaled by adding more
nodes. Large, complex queries can potentially be parallelized across many nodes,
although this gets significantly harder.
Partitioned databases were pioneered in the 1980s by products such as Teradata and
Tandem NonStop SQL [1], and more recently rediscovered by NoSQL databases and
Hadoop-based data warehouses. Some systems are designed for transactional work‐
loads, and others for analytics (see “Transaction Processing or Analytics?” on page
90): this difference affects how the system is tuned, but the fundamentals of partition‐
ing apply to both kinds of workloads.
In this chapter we will first look at different approaches for partitioning large datasets
and observe how the indexing of data interacts with partitioning. We’ll then talk
about rebalancing, which is necessary if you want to add or remove nodes in your
cluster. Finally, we’ll get an overview of how databases route requests to the right par‐
titions and execute queries.
Partitioning and Replication
Partitioning is usually combined with replication so that copies of each partition are
stored on multiple nodes. This means that, even though each record belongs to
exactly one partition, it may still be stored on several different nodes for fault toler‐
ance.
A node may store more than one partition. If a leader–follower replication model is
used, the combination of partitioning and replication can look like Figure 6-1. Each
partition’s leader is assigned to one node, and its followers are assigned to other
nodes. Each node may be the leader for some partitions and a follower for other par‐
titions.
Everything we discussed in Chapter 5 about replication of databases applies equally
to replication of partitions. The choice of partitioning scheme is mostly independent
of the choice of replication scheme, so we will keep things simple and ignore replica‐
tion in this chapter.
200 | Chapter 6: Partitioning

Figure 6-1. Combining replication and partitioning: each node acts as leader for some
partitions and follower for other partitions.
Partitioning of Key-Value Data
Say you have a large amount of data, and you want to partition it. How do you decide
which records to store on which nodes?
Our goal with partitioning is to spread the data and the query load evenly across
nodes. If every node takes a fair share, then—in theory—10 nodes should be able to
handle 10 times as much data and 10 times the read and write throughput of a single
node (ignoring replication for now).
If the partitioning is unfair, so that some partitions have more data or queries than
others, we call it skewed. The presence of skew makes partitioning much less effective.
In an extreme case, all the load could end up on one partition, so 9 out of 10 nodes
are idle and your bottleneck is the single busy node. A partition with disproportion‐
ately high load is called a hot spot.
The simplest approach for avoiding hot spots would be to assign records to nodes
randomly. That would distribute the data quite evenly across the nodes, but it has a
big disadvantage: when you’re trying to read a particular item, you have no way of
knowing which node it is on, so you have to query all nodes in parallel.
We can do better. Let’s assume for now that you have a simple key-value data model,
in which you always access a record by its primary key. For example, in an old-
fashioned paper encyclopedia, you look up an entry by its title; since all the entries
are alphabetically sorted by title, you can quickly find the one you’re looking for.
Partitioning of Key-Value Data | 201

Partitioning by Key Range
One way of partitioning is to assign a continuous range of keys (from some mini‐
mum to some maximum) to each partition, like the volumes of a paper encyclopedia
(Figure 6-2). If you know the boundaries between the ranges, you can easily deter‐
mine which partition contains a given key. If you also know which partition is
assigned to which node, then you can make your request directly to the appropriate
node (or, in the case of the encyclopedia, pick the correct book off the shelf).
Figure 6-2. A print encyclopedia is partitioned by key range.
The ranges of keys are not necessarily evenly spaced, because your data may not be
evenly distributed. For example, in Figure 6-2, volume 1 contains words starting with
A and B, but volume 12 contains words starting with T, U, V, X, Y, and Z. Simply
having one volume per two letters of the alphabet would lead to some volumes being
much bigger than others. In order to distribute the data evenly, the partition bound‐
aries need to adapt to the data.
The partition boundaries might be chosen manually by an administrator, or the data‐
base can choose them automatically (we will discuss choices of partition boundaries
in more detail in “Rebalancing Partitions” on page 209). This partitioning strategy is
used by Bigtable, its open source equivalent HBase [ 2, 3], RethinkDB, and MongoDB
before version 2.4 [4].
Within each partition, we can keep keys in sorted order (see “SSTables and LSM-
Trees”  on page 76). This has the advantage that range scans are easy, and you can
treat the key as a concatenated index in order to fetch several related records in one
query (see “Multi-column indexes” on page 87 ). For example, consider an application
that stores data from a network of sensors, where the key is the timestamp of the
measurement (year-month-day-hour-minute-second). Range scans are very useful in
this case, because they let you easily fetch, say, all the readings from a particular
month.
202 | Chapter 6: Partitioning

However, the downside of key range partitioning is that certain access patterns can
lead to hot spots. If the key is a timestamp, then the partitions correspond to ranges
of time—e.g., one partition per day. Unfortunately, because we write data from the
sensors to the database as the measurements happen, all the writes end up going to
the same partition (the one for today), so that partition can be overloaded with writes
while others sit idle [5].
To avoid this problem in the sensor database, you need to use something other than
the timestamp as the first element of the key. For example, you could prefix each
timestamp with the sensor name so that the partitioning is first by sensor name and
then by time. Assuming you have many sensors active at the same time, the write
load will end up more evenly spread across the partitions. Now, when you want to
fetch the values of multiple sensors within a time range, you need to perform a sepa‐
rate range query for each sensor name.
Partitioning by Hash of Key
Because of this risk of skew and hot spots, many distributed datastores use a hash
function to determine the partition for a given key.
A good hash function takes skewed data and makes it uniformly distributed. Say you
have a 32-bit hash function that takes a string. Whenever you give it a new string, it
returns a seemingly random number between 0 and 2 32 −  1. Even if the input strings
are very similar, their hashes are evenly distributed across that range of numbers.
For partitioning purposes, the hash function need not be cryptographically strong:
for example, Cassandra and MongoDB use MD5, and Voldemort uses the Fowler–
Noll–Vo function. Many programming languages have simple hash functions built in
(as they are used for hash tables), but they may not be suitable for partitioning: for
example, in Java’s Object.hashCode() and Ruby’s Object#hash, the same key may
have a different hash value in different processes [6].
Once you have a suitable hash function for keys, you can assign each partition a
range of hashes (rather than a range of keys), and every key whose hash falls within a
partition’s range will be stored in that partition. This is illustrated in Figure 6-3.
Partitioning of Key-Value Data | 203

Figure 6-3. Partitioning by hash of key.
This technique is good at distributing keys fairly among the partitions. The partition
boundaries can be evenly spaced, or they can be chosen pseudorandomly (in which
case the technique is sometimes known as consistent hashing).
Consistent Hashing
Consistent hashing, as defined by Karger et al. [7], is a way of evenly distributing load
across an internet-wide system of caches such as a content delivery network (CDN).
It uses randomly chosen partition boundaries to avoid the need for central control or
distributed consensus. Note that consistent here has nothing to do with replica consis‐
tency (see Chapter 5 ) or ACID consistency (see Chapter 7 ), but rather describes a
particular approach to rebalancing.
As we shall see in “Rebalancing Partitions” on page 209, this particular approach
actually doesn’t work very well for databases [ 8], so it is rarely used in practice (the
documentation of some databases still refers to consistent hashing, but it is often
inaccurate). Because this is so confusing, it’s best to avoid the term consistent hashing
and just call it hash partitioning instead.
Unfortunately however, by using the hash of the key for partitioning we lose a nice
property of key-range partitioning: the ability to do efficient range queries. Keys that
were once adjacent are now scattered across all the partitions, so their sort order is
lost. In MongoDB, if you have enabled hash-based sharding mode, any range query
has to be sent to all partitions [ 4]. Range queries on the primary key are not sup‐
ported by Riak [9], Couchbase [10], or Voldemort. 
Cassandra achieves a compromise between the two partitioning strategies [ 11, 12,
13]. A table in Cassandra can be declared with a compound primary key consisting of
several columns. Only the first part of that key is hashed to determine the partition,
but the other columns are used as a concatenated index for sorting the data in Cas‐
sandra’s SSTables. A query therefore cannot search for a range of values within the
204 | Chapter 6: Partitioning

first column of a compound key, but if it specifies a fixed value for the first column, it
can perform an efficient range scan over the other columns of the key. 
The concatenated index approach enables an elegant data model for one-to-many
relationships. For example, on a social media site, one user may post many updates. If
the primary key for updates is chosen to be (user_id, update_timestamp), then you
can efficiently retrieve all updates made by a particular user within some time inter‐
val, sorted by timestamp. Different users may be stored on different partitions, but
within each user, the updates are stored ordered by timestamp on a single partition. 
Skewed Workloads and Relieving Hot Spots
As discussed, hashing a key to determine its partition can help reduce hot spots.
However, it can’t avoid them entirely: in the extreme case where all reads and writes
are for the same key, you still end up with all requests being routed to the same parti‐
tion.
This kind of workload is perhaps unusual, but not unheard of: for example, on a
social media site, a celebrity user with millions of followers may cause a storm of
activity when they do something [ 14]. This event can result in a large volume of
writes to the same key (where the key is perhaps the user ID of the celebrity, or the ID
of the action that people are commenting on). Hashing the key doesn’t help, as the
hash of two identical IDs is still the same.
Today, most data systems are not able to automatically compensate for such a highly
skewed workload, so it’s the responsibility of the application to reduce the skew. For
example, if one key is known to be very hot, a simple technique is to add a random
number to the beginning or end of the key. Just a two-digit decimal random number
would split the writes to the key evenly across 100 different keys, allowing those keys
to be distributed to different partitions.
However, having split the writes across different keys, any reads now have to do addi‐
tional work, as they have to read the data from all 100 keys and combine it. This tech‐
nique also requires additional bookkeeping: it only makes sense to append the
random number for the small number of hot keys; for the vast majority of keys with
low write throughput this would be unnecessary overhead. Thus, you also need some
way of keeping track of which keys are being split.
Perhaps in the future, data systems will be able to automatically detect and compen‐
sate for skewed workloads; but for now, you need to think through the trade-offs for
your own application. 
Partitioning of Key-Value Data | 205

ii. If your database only supports a key-value model, you might be tempted to implement a secondary index
yourself by creating a mapping from values to document IDs in application code. If you go down this route,
you need to take great care to ensure your indexes remain consistent with the underlying data. Race condi‐
tions and intermittent write failures (where some changes were saved but others weren’t) can very easily cause
the data to go out of sync—see “The need for multi-object transactions” on page 231 .
Partitioning and Secondary Indexes
The partitioning schemes we have discussed so far rely on a key-value data model. If
records are only ever accessed via their primary key, we can determine the partition
from that key and use it to route read and write requests to the partition responsible
for that key.
The situation becomes more complicated if secondary indexes are involved (see also
“Other Indexing Structures” on page 85). A secondary index usually doesn’t identify
a record uniquely but rather is a way of searching for occurrences of a particular
value: find all actions by user 123, find all articles containing the word hogwash, find
all cars whose color is red, and so on.
Secondary indexes are the bread and butter of relational databases, and they are com‐
mon in document databases too. Many key-value stores (such as HBase and Volde‐
mort) have avoided secondary indexes because of their added implementation
complexity, but some (such as Riak) have started adding them because they are so
useful for data modeling. And finally, secondary indexes are the raison d’être  of
search servers such as Solr and Elasticsearch.
The problem with secondary indexes is that they don’t map neatly to partitions.
There are two main approaches to partitioning a database with secondary indexes:
document-based partitioning and term-based partitioning.
Partitioning Secondary Indexes by Document
For example, imagine you are operating a website for selling used cars (illustrated in
Figure 6-4). Each listing has a unique ID—call it the document ID—and you partition
the database by the document ID (for example, IDs 0 to 499 in partition 0, IDs 500 to
999 in partition 1, etc.).
You want to let users search for cars, allowing them to filter by color and by make, so
you need a secondary index on color and make (in a document database these would
be fields; in a relational database they would be columns). If you have declared the
index, the database can perform the indexing automatically. ii For example, whenever
a red car is added to the database, the database partition automatically adds it to the
list of document IDs for the index entry color:red.
206 | Chapter 6: Partitioning

Figure 6-4. Partitioning secondary indexes by document.
In this indexing approach, each partition is completely separate: each partition main‐
tains its own secondary indexes, covering only the documents in that partition. It
doesn’t care what data is stored in other partitions. Whenever you need to write to
the database—to add, remove, or update a document—you only need to deal with the
partition that contains the document ID that you are writing. For that reason, a
document-partitioned index is also known as a local index  (as opposed to a global
index, described in the next section).
However, reading from a document-partitioned index requires care: unless you have
done something special with the document IDs, there is no reason why all the cars
with a particular color or a particular make would be in the same partition. In
Figure 6-4, red cars appear in both partition 0 and partition 1. Thus, if you want to
search for red cars, you need to send the query to all partitions, and combine all the
results you get back.
This approach to querying a partitioned database is sometimes known as scatter/
gather, and it can make read queries on secondary indexes quite expensive. Even if
you query the partitions in parallel, scatter/gather is prone to tail latency amplifica‐
tion (see “Percentiles in Practice” on page 16). Nevertheless, it is widely used: Mon‐
goDB, Riak [15], Cassandra [16], Elasticsearch [17], SolrCloud [18], and VoltDB [19]
all use document-partitioned secondary indexes. Most database vendors recommend
that you structure your partitioning scheme so that secondary index queries can be
served from a single partition, but that is not always possible, especially when you’re
using multiple secondary indexes in a single query (such as filtering cars by color and
by make at the same time).
Partitioning and Secondary Indexes | 207

Figure 6-5. Partitioning secondary indexes by term.
Partitioning Secondary Indexes by Term
Rather than each partition having its own secondary index (a local index ), we can
construct a global index that covers data in all partitions. However, we can’t just store
that index on one node, since it would likely become a bottleneck and defeat the pur‐
pose of partitioning. A global index must also be partitioned, but it can be partitioned
differently from the primary key index.
Figure 6-5  illustrates what this could look like: red cars from all partitions appear
under color:red in the index, but the index is partitioned so that colors starting with
the letters a to r appear in partition 0 and colors starting with s to z appear in parti‐
tion 1. The index on the make of car is partitioned similarly (with the partition
boundary being between f and h).
We call this kind of index term-partitioned, because the term we’re looking for deter‐
mines the partition of the index. Here, a term would be color:red, for example. The
name term comes from full-text indexes (a particular kind of secondary index), where
the terms are all the words that occur in a document.
As before, we can partition the index by the term itself, or using a hash of the term.
Partitioning by the term itself can be useful for range scans (e.g., on a numeric prop‐
erty, such as the asking price of the car), whereas partitioning on a hash of the term
gives a more even distribution of load.
The advantage of a global (term-partitioned) index over a document-partitioned
index is that it can make reads more efficient: rather than doing scatter/gather over
all partitions, a client only needs to make a request to the partition containing the
term that it wants. However, the downside of a global index is that writes are slower
and more complicated, because a write to a single document may now affect multiple
208 | Chapter 6: Partitioning

partitions of the index (every term in the document might be on a different partition,
on a different node).
In an ideal world, the index would always be up to date, and every document written
to the database would immediately be reflected in the index. However, in a term-
partitioned index, that would require a distributed transaction across all partitions
affected by a write, which is not supported in all databases (see Chapter 7 and Chap‐
ter 9).
In practice, updates to global secondary indexes are often asynchronous (that is, if
you read the index shortly after a write, the change you just made may not yet be
reflected in the index). For example, Amazon DynamoDB states that its global secon‐
dary indexes are updated within a fraction of a second in normal circumstances, but
may experience longer propagation delays in cases of faults in the infrastructure [20].
Other uses of global term-partitioned indexes include Riak’s search feature [ 21] and
the Oracle data warehouse, which lets you choose between local and global indexing
[22]. We will return to the topic of implementing term-partitioned secondary indexes
in Chapter 12. 
Rebalancing Partitions
Over time, things change in a database:
• The query throughput increases, so you want to add more CPUs to handle the
load.
• The dataset size increases, so you want to add more disks and RAM to store it.
• A machine fails, and other machines need to take over the failed machine’s
responsibilities.
All of these changes call for data and requests to be moved from one node to another.
The process of moving load from one node in the cluster to another is called reba‐
lancing.
No matter which partitioning scheme is used, rebalancing is usually expected to meet
some minimum requirements:
• After rebalancing, the load (data storage, read and write requests) should be
shared fairly between the nodes in the cluster.
• While rebalancing is happening, the database should continue accepting reads
and writes.
• No more data than necessary should be moved between nodes, to make rebalanc‐
ing fast and to minimize the network and disk I/O load.
Rebalancing Partitions | 209

Strategies for Rebalancing
There are a few different ways of assigning partitions to nodes [ 23]. Let’s briefly dis‐
cuss each in turn.
How not to do it: hash mod N
When partitioning by the hash of a key, we said earlier ( Figure 6-3) that it’s best to
divide the possible hashes into ranges and assign each range to a partition (e.g., assign
key to partition 0 if 0 ≤ hash(key) < b0, to partition 1 if b0 ≤ hash(key) < b1, etc.).
Perhaps you wondered why we don’t just use mod (the % operator in many program‐
ming languages). For example, hash(key) mod 10 would return a number between 0
and 9 (if we write the hash as a decimal number, the hash mod 10 would be the last
digit). If we have 10 nodes, numbered 0 to 9, that seems like an easy way of assigning
each key to a node.
The problem with the mod N  approach is that if the number of nodes N changes,
most of the keys will need to be moved from one node to another. For example, say
hash(key) = 123456. If you initially have 10 nodes, that key starts out on node 6
(because 123456 mod 10 = 6). When you grow to 11 nodes, the key needs to move to
node 3 (123456 mod 11 = 3), and when you grow to 12 nodes, it needs to move to
node 0 (123456 mod 12 = 0). Such frequent moves make rebalancing excessively
expensive.
We need an approach that doesn’t move data around more than necessary.
Fixed number of partitions
Fortunately, there is a fairly simple solution: create many more partitions than there
are nodes, and assign several partitions to each node. For example, a database run‐
ning on a cluster of 10 nodes may be split into 1,000 partitions from the outset so that
approximately 100 partitions are assigned to each node.
Now, if a node is added to the cluster, the new node can steal a few partitions from
every existing node until partitions are fairly distributed once again. This process is
illustrated in Figure 6-6. If a node is removed from the cluster, the same happens in
reverse.
Only entire partitions are moved between nodes. The number of partitions does not
change, nor does the assignment of keys to partitions. The only thing that changes is
the assignment of partitions to nodes. This change of assignment is not immediate—
it takes some time to transfer a large amount of data over the network—so the old
assignment of partitions is used for any reads and writes that happen while the trans‐
fer is in progress.
210 | Chapter 6: Partitioning

Figure 6-6. Adding a new node to a database cluster with multiple partitions per node.
In principle, you can even account for mismatched hardware in your cluster: by
assigning more partitions to nodes that are more powerful, you can force those nodes
to take a greater share of the load.
This approach to rebalancing is used in Riak [15], Elasticsearch [24], Couchbase [10],
and Voldemort [25].
In this configuration, the number of partitions is usually fixed when the database is
first set up and not changed afterward. Although in principle it’s possible to split and
merge partitions (see the next section), a fixed number of partitions is operationally
simpler, and so many fixed-partition databases choose not to implement partition
splitting. Thus, the number of partitions configured at the outset is the maximum
number of nodes you can have, so you need to choose it high enough to accommo‐
date future growth. However, each partition also has management overhead, so it’s
counterproductive to choose too high a number.
Choosing the right number of partitions is difficult if the total size of the dataset is
highly variable (for example, if it starts small but may grow much larger over time).
Since each partition contains a fixed fraction of the total data, the size of each parti‐
tion grows proportionally to the total amount of data in the cluster. If partitions are
very large, rebalancing and recovery from node failures become expensive. But if par‐
titions are too small, they incur too much overhead. The best performance is
achieved when the size of partitions is “just right,” neither too big nor too small,
which can be hard to achieve if the number of partitions is fixed but the dataset size
varies.
Rebalancing Partitions | 211

Dynamic partitioning
For databases that use key range partitioning (see “Partitioning by Key Range” on
page 202), a fixed number of partitions with fixed boundaries would be very incon‐
venient: if you got the boundaries wrong, you could end up with all of the data in one
partition and all of the other partitions empty. Reconfiguring the partition bound‐
aries manually would be very tedious.
For that reason, key range–partitioned databases such as HBase and RethinkDB cre‐
ate partitions dynamically. When a partition grows to exceed a configured size (on
HBase, the default is 10 GB), it is split into two partitions so that approximately half
of the data ends up on each side of the split [ 26]. Conversely, if lots of data is deleted
and a partition shrinks below some threshold, it can be merged with an adjacent par‐
tition. This process is similar to what happens at the top level of a B-tree (see “B-
Trees” on page 79 ).
Each partition is assigned to one node, and each node can handle multiple partitions,
like in the case of a fixed number of partitions. After a large partition has been split,
one of its two halves can be transferred to another node in order to balance the load.
In the case of HBase, the transfer of partition files happens through HDFS, the
underlying distributed filesystem [3].
An advantage of dynamic partitioning is that the number of partitions adapts to the
total data volume. If there is only a small amount of data, a small number of parti‐
tions is sufficient, so overheads are small; if there is a huge amount of data, the size of
each individual partition is limited to a configurable maximum [23].
However, a caveat is that an empty database starts off with a single partition, since
there is no a priori information about where to draw the partition boundaries. While
the dataset is small—until it hits the point at which the first partition is split—all
writes have to be processed by a single node while the other nodes sit idle. To miti‐
gate this issue, HBase and MongoDB allow an initial set of partitions to be configured
on an empty database (this is called pre-splitting). In the case of key-range partition‐
ing, pre-splitting requires that you already know what the key distribution is going to
look like [4, 26].
Dynamic partitioning is not only suitable for key range–partitioned data, but can
equally well be used with hash-partitioned data. MongoDB since version 2.4 supports
both key-range and hash partitioning, and it splits partitions dynamically in either
case.
Partitioning proportionally to nodes
With dynamic partitioning, the number of partitions is proportional to the size of the
dataset, since the splitting and merging processes keep the size of each partition
between some fixed minimum and maximum. On the other hand, with a fixed num‐
212 | Chapter 6: Partitioning