ber of partitions, the size of each partition is proportional to the size of the dataset. In
both of these cases, the number of partitions is independent of the number of nodes.
A third option, used by Cassandra and Ketama, is to make the number of partitions
proportional to the number of nodes—in other words, to have a fixed number of par‐
titions per node [23, 27, 28]. In this case, the size of each partition grows proportion‐
ally to the dataset size while the number of nodes remains unchanged, but when you
increase the number of nodes, the partitions become smaller again. Since a larger
data volume generally requires a larger number of nodes to store, this approach also
keeps the size of each partition fairly stable.
When a new node joins the cluster, it randomly chooses a fixed number of existing
partitions to split, and then takes ownership of one half of each of those split parti‐
tions while leaving the other half of each partition in place. The randomization can
produce unfair splits, but when averaged over a larger number of partitions (in Cas‐
sandra, 256 partitions per node by default), the new node ends up taking a fair share
of the load from the existing nodes. Cassandra 3.0 introduced an alternative rebalanc‐
ing algorithm that avoids unfair splits [29].
Picking partition boundaries randomly requires that hash-based partitioning is used
(so the boundaries can be picked from the range of numbers produced by the hash
function). Indeed, this approach corresponds most closely to the original definition
of consistent hashing [ 7] (see “Consistent Hashing” on page 204). Newer hash func‐
tions can achieve a similar effect with lower metadata overhead [8].
Operations: Automatic or Manual Rebalancing
There is one important question with regard to rebalancing that we have glossed
over: does the rebalancing happen automatically or manually?
There is a gradient between fully automatic rebalancing (the system decides automat‐
ically when to move partitions from one node to another, without any administrator
interaction) and fully manual (the assignment of partitions to nodes is explicitly con‐
figured by an administrator, and only changes when the administrator explicitly
reconfigures it). For example, Couchbase, Riak, and Voldemort generate a suggested
partition assignment automatically, but require an administrator to commit it before
it takes effect.
Fully automated rebalancing can be convenient, because there is less operational
work to do for normal maintenance. However, it can be unpredictable. Rebalancing
is an expensive operation, because it requires rerouting requests and moving a large
amount of data from one node to another. If it is not done carefully, this process can
overload the network or the nodes and harm the performance of other requests while
the rebalancing is in progress.
Rebalancing Partitions | 213

Such automation can be dangerous in combination with automatic failure detection.
For example, say one node is overloaded and is temporarily slow to respond to
requests. The other nodes conclude that the overloaded node is dead, and automati‐
cally rebalance the cluster to move load away from it. This puts additional load on the
overloaded node, other nodes, and the network—making the situation worse and
potentially causing a cascading failure.
For that reason, it can be a good thing to have a human in the loop for rebalancing.
It’s slower than a fully automatic process, but it can help prevent operational
surprises. 
Request Routing
We have now partitioned our dataset across multiple nodes running on multiple
machines. But there remains an open question: when a client wants to make a
request, how does it know which node to connect to? As partitions are rebalanced,
the assignment of partitions to nodes changes. Somebody needs to stay on top of
those changes in order to answer the question: if I want to read or write the key “foo”,
which IP address and port number do I need to connect to?
This is an instance of a more general problem called service discovery , which isn’t
limited to just databases. Any piece of software that is accessible over a network has
this problem, especially if it is aiming for high availability (running in a redundant
configuration on multiple machines). Many companies have written their own in-
house service discovery tools, and many of these have been released as open source
[30].
On a high level, there are a few different approaches to this problem (illustrated in
Figure 6-7):
1. Allow clients to contact any node (e.g., via a round-robin load balancer). If that
node coincidentally owns the partition to which the request applies, it can handle
the request directly; otherwise, it forwards the request to the appropriate node,
receives the reply, and passes the reply along to the client.
2. Send all requests from clients to a routing tier first, which determines the node
that should handle each request and forwards it accordingly. This routing tier
does not itself handle any requests; it only acts as a partition-aware load balancer.
3. Require that clients be aware of the partitioning and the assignment of partitions
to nodes. In this case, a client can connect directly to the appropriate node,
without any intermediary.
In all cases, the key problem is: how does the component making the routing decision
(which may be one of the nodes, or the routing tier, or the client) learn about changes
in the assignment of partitions to nodes?
214 | Chapter 6: Partitioning

Figure 6-7. Three different ways of routing a request to the right node.
This is a challenging problem, because it is important that all participants agree—
otherwise requests would be sent to the wrong nodes and not handled correctly.
There are protocols for achieving consensus in a distributed system, but they are hard
to implement correctly (see Chapter 9).
Many distributed data systems rely on a separate coordination service such as Zoo‐
Keeper to keep track of this cluster metadata, as illustrated in Figure 6-8. Each node
registers itself in ZooKeeper, and ZooKeeper maintains the authoritative mapping of
partitions to nodes. Other actors, such as the routing tier or the partitioning-aware
client, can subscribe to this information in ZooKeeper. Whenever a partition changes
ownership, or a node is added or removed, ZooKeeper notifies the routing tier so that
it can keep its routing information up to date.
Figure 6-8. Using ZooKeeper to keep track of assignment of partitions to nodes.
Request Routing | 215

For example, LinkedIn’s Espresso uses Helix [ 31] for cluster management (which in
turn relies on ZooKeeper), implementing a routing tier as shown in Figure 6-8 .
HBase, SolrCloud, and Kafka also use ZooKeeper to track partition assignment.
MongoDB has a similar architecture, but it relies on its own config server implemen‐
tation and mongos daemons as the routing tier.
Cassandra and Riak take a different approach: they use a gossip protocol among the
nodes to disseminate any changes in cluster state. Requests can be sent to any node,
and that node forwards them to the appropriate node for the requested partition
(approach 1 in Figure 6-7). This model puts more complexity in the database nodes
but avoids the dependency on an external coordination service such as ZooKeeper.
Couchbase does not rebalance automatically, which simplifies the design. Normally it
is configured with a routing tier called moxi, which learns about routing changes
from the cluster nodes [32].
When using a routing tier or when sending requests to a random node, clients still
need to find the IP addresses to connect to. These are not as fast-changing as the
assignment of partitions to nodes, so it is often sufficient to use DNS for this purpose.
Parallel Query Execution
So far we have focused on very simple queries that read or write a single key (plus
scatter/gather queries in the case of document-partitioned secondary indexes). This is
about the level of access supported by most NoSQL distributed datastores.
However, massively parallel processing  (MPP) relational database products, often
used for analytics, are much more sophisticated in the types of queries they support.
A typical data warehouse query contains several join, filtering, grouping, and aggre‐
gation operations. The MPP query optimizer breaks this complex query into a num‐
ber of execution stages and partitions, many of which can be executed in parallel on
different nodes of the database cluster. Queries that involve scanning over large parts
of the dataset particularly benefit from such parallel execution.
Fast parallel execution of data warehouse queries is a specialized topic, and given the
business importance of analytics, it receives a lot of commercial interest. We will dis‐
cuss some techniques for parallel query execution in Chapter 10. For a more detailed
overview of techniques used in parallel databases, please see the references [1, 33]. 
Summary
In this chapter we explored different ways of partitioning a large dataset into smaller
subsets. Partitioning is necessary when you have so much data that storing and pro‐
cessing it on a single machine is no longer feasible.
216 | Chapter 6: Partitioning

The goal of partitioning is to spread the data and query load evenly across multiple
machines, avoiding hot spots (nodes with disproportionately high load). This
requires choosing a partitioning scheme that is appropriate to your data, and reba‐
lancing the partitions when nodes are added to or removed from the cluster.
We discussed two main approaches to partitioning:
• Key range partitioning , where keys are sorted, and a partition owns all the keys
from some minimum up to some maximum. Sorting has the advantage that effi‐
cient range queries are possible, but there is a risk of hot spots if the application
often accesses keys that are close together in the sorted order.
In this approach, partitions are typically rebalanced dynamically by splitting the
range into two subranges when a partition gets too big.
• Hash partitioning, where a hash function is applied to each key, and a partition
owns a range of hashes. This method destroys the ordering of keys, making range
queries inefficient, but may distribute load more evenly.
When partitioning by hash, it is common to create a fixed number of partitions
in advance, to assign several partitions to each node, and to move entire parti‐
tions from one node to another when nodes are added or removed. Dynamic
partitioning can also be used.
Hybrid approaches are also possible, for example with a compound key: using one
part of the key to identify the partition and another part for the sort order.
We also discussed the interaction between partitioning and secondary indexes. A sec‐
ondary index also needs to be partitioned, and there are two methods:
• Document-partitioned indexes  (local indexes), where the secondary indexes are
stored in the same partition as the primary key and value. This means that only a
single partition needs to be updated on write, but a read of the secondary index
requires a scatter/gather across all partitions.
• Term-partitioned indexes (global indexes), where the secondary indexes are parti‐
tioned separately, using the indexed values. An entry in the secondary index may
include records from all partitions of the primary key. When a document is writ‐
ten, several partitions of the secondary index need to be updated; however, a read
can be served from a single partition.
Finally, we discussed techniques for routing queries to the appropriate partition,
which range from simple partition-aware load balancing to sophisticated parallel
query execution engines.
By design, every partition operates mostly independently—that’s what allows a parti‐
tioned database to scale to multiple machines. However, operations that need to write
Summary | 217

to several partitions can be difficult to reason about: for example, what happens if the
write to one partition succeeds, but another fails? We will address that question in the
following chapters. 
References
[1] David J. DeWitt and Jim N. Gray: “ Parallel Database Systems: The Future of High
Performance Database Systems,” Communications of the ACM, volume 35, number 6,
pages 85–98, June 1992. doi:10.1145/129888.129894
[2] Lars George: “ HBase vs. BigTable Comparison,” larsgeorge.com, November 2009.
[3] “ The Apache HBase Reference Guide ,” Apache Software Foundation,
hbase.apache.org, 2014.
[4] MongoDB, Inc.: “ New Hash-Based Sharding Feature in MongoDB 2.4,” blog.mon‐
godb.org, April 10, 2013.
[5] Ikai Lan: “ App Engine Datastore Tip: Monotonically Increasing Values Are Bad ,”
ikaisays.com, January 25, 2011.
[6] Martin Kleppmann: “ Java’s hashCode Is Not Safe for Distributed Systems ,” mar‐
tin.kleppmann.com, June 18, 2012.
[7] David Karger, Eric Lehman, Tom Leighton, et al.: “ Consistent Hashing and Ran‐
dom Trees: Distributed Caching Protocols for Relieving Hot Spots on the World
Wide Web ,” at 29th Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing  (STOC),
pages 654–663, 1997. doi:10.1145/258533.258660
[8] John Lamping and Eric Veach: “ A Fast, Minimal Memory, Consistent Hash Algo‐
rithm,” arxiv.org, June 2014.
[9] Eric Redmond: “ A Little Riak Book,” Version 1.4.0, Basho Technologies, Septem‐
ber 2013.
[10] “ Couchbase 2.5 Administrator Guide,” Couchbase, Inc., 2014.
[11] Avinash Lakshman and Prashant Malik: “ Cassandra – A Decentralized Struc‐
tured Storage System ,” at 3rd ACM SIGOPS International Workshop on Large Scale
Distributed Systems and Middleware (LADIS), October 2009.
[12] Jonathan Ellis: “ Facebook’s Cassandra Paper, Annotated and Compared to
Apache Cassandra 2.0,” datastax.com, September 12, 2013.
[13] “ Introduction to Cassandra Query Language,” DataStax, Inc., 2014.
[14] Samuel Axon: “ 3% of Twitter’s Servers Dedicated to Justin Bieber ,” masha‐
ble.com, September 7, 2010.
[15] “ Riak 1.4.8 Docs,” Basho Technologies, Inc., 2014.
218 | Chapter 6: Partitioning

[16] Richard Low: “ The Sweet Spot for Cassandra Secondary Indexing,” wentnet.com,
October 21, 2013.
[17] Zachary Tong: “ Customizing Your Document Routing ,” elasticsearch.org, June
3, 2013.
[18] “ Apache Solr Reference Guide,” Apache Software Foundation, 2014.
[19] Andrew Pavlo: “ H-Store Frequently Asked Questions ,” hstore.cs.brown.edu,
October 2013.
[20] “ Amazon DynamoDB Developer Guide,” Amazon Web Services, Inc., 2014.
[21] Rusty Klophaus: “ Difference Between 2I and Search,” email to riak-users mailing
list, lists.basho.com, October 25, 2011.
[22] Donald K. Burleson: “ Object Partitioning in Oracle,” dba-oracle.com, November
8, 2000.
[23] Eric Evans: “ Rethinking Topology in Cassandra,” at ApacheCon Europe, Novem‐
ber 2012.
[24] Rafał Kuć: “ Reroute API Explained,” elasticsearchserverbook.com, September 30,
2013.
[25] “ Project Voldemort Documentation,” project-voldemort.com.
[26] Enis Soztutar: “ Apache HBase Region Splitting and Merging ,” hortonworks.com,
February 1, 2013.
[27] Brandon Williams: “ Virtual Nodes in Cassandra 1.2 ,” datastax.com, December
4, 2012.
[28] Richard Jones: “ libketama: Consistent Hashing Library for Memcached Clients ,”
metabrew.com, April 10, 2007.
[29] Branimir Lambov: “ New Token Allocation Algorithm in Cassandra 3.0 ,” data‐
stax.com, January 28, 2016.
[30] Jason Wilder: “ Open-Source Service Discovery ,” jasonwilder.com, February
2014.
[31] Kishore Gopalakrishna, Shi Lu, Zhen Zhang, et al.: “ Untangling Cluster Manage‐
ment with Helix ,” at ACM Symposium on Cloud Computing  (SoCC), October 2012.
doi:10.1145/2391229.2391248
[32] “ Moxi 1.8 Manual,” Couchbase, Inc., 2014.
[33] Shivnath Babu and Herodotos Herodotou: “ Massively Parallel Databases and
MapReduce Systems ,” Foundations and Trends in Databases , volume 5, number 1,
pages 1–104, November 2013. doi:10.1561/1900000036
Summary | 219

CHAPTER 7
Transactions
Some authors have claimed that general two-phase commit is too expensive to support,
because of the performance or availability problems that it brings. We believe it is better to
have application programmers deal with performance problems due to overuse of transac‐
tions as bottlenecks arise, rather than always coding around the lack of transactions.
—James Corbett et al., Spanner: Google’s Globally-Distributed Database  (2012)
In the harsh reality of data systems, many things can go wrong:
• The database software or hardware may fail at any time (including in the middle
of a write operation).
• The application may crash at any time (including halfway through a series of
operations).
• Interruptions in the network can unexpectedly cut off the application from the
database, or one database node from another.
• Several clients may write to the database at the same time, overwriting each
other’s changes.
• A client may read data that doesn’t make sense because it has only partially been
updated.
• Race conditions between clients can cause surprising bugs.
In order to be reliable, a system has to deal with these faults and ensure that they
don’t cause catastrophic failure of the entire system. However, implementing fault-
tolerance mechanisms is a lot of work. It requires a lot of careful thinking about all
the things that can go wrong, and a lot of testing to ensure that the solution actually
works.
221

For decades, transactions have been the mechanism of choice for simplifying these
issues. A transaction is a way for an application to group several reads and writes
together into a logical unit. Conceptually, all the reads and writes in a transaction are
executed as one operation: either the entire transaction succeeds ( commit) or it fails
(abort, rollback). If it fails, the application can safely retry. With transactions, error
handling becomes much simpler for an application, because it doesn’t need to worry
about partial failure—i.e., the case where some operations succeed and some fail (for
whatever reason).
If you have spent years working with transactions, they may seem obvious, but we
shouldn’t take them for granted. Transactions are not a law of nature; they were cre‐
ated with a purpose, namely to simplify the programming model  for applications
accessing a database. By using transactions, the application is free to ignore certain
potential error scenarios and concurrency issues, because the database takes care of
them instead (we call these safety guarantees).
Not every application needs transactions, and sometimes there are advantages to
weakening transactional guarantees or abandoning them entirely (for example, to
achieve higher performance or higher availability). Some safety properties can be
achieved without transactions.
How do you figure out whether you need transactions? In order to answer that ques‐
tion, we first need to understand exactly what safety guarantees transactions can pro‐
vide, and what costs are associated with them. Although transactions seem
straightforward at first glance, there are actually many subtle but important details
that come into play.
In this chapter, we will examine many examples of things that can go wrong, and
explore the algorithms that databases use to guard against those issues. We will go
especially deep in the area of concurrency control, discussing various kinds of race
conditions that can occur and how databases implement isolation levels such as read
committed, snapshot isolation, and serializability.
This chapter applies to both single-node and distributed databases; in Chapter 8 we
will focus the discussion on the particular challenges that arise only in distributed
systems.
The Slippery Concept of a Transaction
Almost all relational databases today, and some nonrelational databases, support
transactions. Most of them follow the style that was introduced in 1975 by IBM Sys‐
tem R, the first SQL database [ 1, 2, 3]. Although some implementation details have
changed, the general idea has remained virtually the same for 40 years: the transac‐
tion support in MySQL, PostgreSQL, Oracle, SQL Server, etc., is uncannily similar to
that of System R.
222 | Chapter 7: Transactions

In the late 2000s, nonrelational (NoSQL) databases started gaining popularity. They
aimed to improve upon the relational status quo by offering a choice of new data
models (see Chapter 2 ), and by including replication ( Chapter 5 ) and partitioning
(Chapter 6) by default. Transactions were the main casualty of this movement: many
of this new generation of databases abandoned transactions entirely, or redefined the
word to describe a much weaker set of guarantees than had previously been under‐
stood [4].
With the hype around this new crop of distributed databases, there emerged a popu‐
lar belief that transactions were the antithesis of scalability, and that any large-scale
system would have to abandon transactions in order to maintain good performance
and high availability [ 5, 6]. On the other hand, transactional guarantees are some‐
times presented by database vendors as an essential requirement for “serious applica‐
tions” with “valuable data.” Both viewpoints are pure hyperbole.
The truth is not that simple: like every other technical design choice, transactions
have advantages and limitations. In order to understand those trade-offs, let’s go into
the details of the guarantees that transactions can provide—both in normal operation
and in various extreme (but realistic) circumstances.
The Meaning of ACID
The safety guarantees provided by transactions are often described by the well-
known acronym ACID, which stands for Atomicity, Consistency, Isolation, and Dura‐
bility. It was coined in 1983 by Theo Härder and Andreas Reuter [ 7] in an effort to
establish precise terminology for fault-tolerance mechanisms in databases.
However, in practice, one database’s implementation of ACID does not equal
another’s implementation. For example, as we shall see, there is a lot of ambiguity
around the meaning of isolation [8]. The high-level idea is sound, but the devil is in
the details. Today, when a system claims to be “ACID compliant,” it’s unclear what
guarantees you can actually expect. ACID has unfortunately become mostly a mar‐
keting term.
(Systems that do not meet the ACID criteria are sometimes called BASE, which
stands for Basically Available , Soft state , and Eventual consistency  [9]. This is even
more vague than the definition of ACID. It seems that the only sensible definition of
BASE is “not ACID”; i.e., it can mean almost anything you want.)
Let’s dig into the definitions of atomicity, consistency, isolation, and durability, as
this will let us refine our idea of transactions.
Atomicity
In general, atomic refers to something that cannot be broken down into smaller parts.
The word means similar but subtly different things in different branches of comput‐
The Slippery Concept of a Transaction | 223

ing. For example, in multi-threaded programming, if one thread executes an atomic
operation, that means there is no way that another thread could see the half-finished
result of the operation. The system can only be in the state it was before the operation
or after the operation, not something in between.
By contrast, in the context of ACID, atomicity is not about concurrency. It does not
describe what happens if several processes try to access the same data at the same
time, because that is covered under the letter I, for isolation (see “Isolation”  on page
225).
Rather, ACID atomicity describes what happens if a client wants to make several
writes, but a fault occurs after some of the writes have been processed—for example,
a process crashes, a network connection is interrupted, a disk becomes full, or some
integrity constraint is violated. If the writes are grouped together into an atomic
transaction, and the transaction cannot be completed (committed) due to a fault, then
the transaction is aborted and the database must discard or undo any writes it has
made so far in that transaction.
Without atomicity, if an error occurs partway through making multiple changes, it’s
difficult to know which changes have taken effect and which haven’t. The application
could try again, but that risks making the same change twice, leading to duplicate or
incorrect data. Atomicity simplifies this problem: if a transaction was aborted, the
application can be sure that it didn’t change anything, so it can safely be retried.
The ability to abort a transaction on error and have all writes from that transaction
discarded is the defining feature of ACID atomicity. Perhaps abortability would have
been a better term than atomicity, but we will stick with atomicity since that’s the
usual word.
Consistency
The word consistency is terribly overloaded:
• In Chapter 5  we discussed replica consistency  and the issue of eventual consis‐
tency that arises in asynchronously replicated systems (see “Problems with Repli‐
cation Lag” on page 161 ).
• Consistent hashing is an approach to partitioning that some systems use for reba‐
lancing (see “Consistent Hashing” on page 204 ).
• In the CAP theorem (see Chapter 9), the word consistency is used to mean linear‐
izability (see “Linearizability” on page 324 ).
• In the context of ACID, consistency refers to an application-specific notion of the
database being in a “good state.”
It’s unfortunate that the same word is used with at least four different meanings.
224 | Chapter 7: Transactions

i. Joe Hellerstein has remarked that the C in ACID was “tossed in to make the acronym work” in Härder and
Reuter’s paper [ 7], and that it wasn’t considered important at the time.
The idea of ACID consistency is that you have certain statements about your data
(invariants) that must always be true—for example, in an accounting system, credits
and debits across all accounts must always be balanced. If a transaction starts with a
database that is valid according to these invariants, and any writes during the transac‐
tion preserve the validity, then you can be sure that the invariants are always satisfied.
However, this idea of consistency depends on the application’s notion of invariants,
and it’s the application’s responsibility to define its transactions correctly so that they
preserve consistency. This is not something that the database can guarantee: if you
write bad data that violates your invariants, the database can’t stop you. (Some spe‐
cific kinds of invariants can be checked by the database, for example using foreign
key constraints or uniqueness constraints. However, in general, the application
defines what data is valid or invalid—the database only stores it.)
Atomicity, isolation, and durability are properties of the database, whereas consis‐
tency (in the ACID sense) is a property of the application. The application may rely
on the database’s atomicity and isolation properties in order to achieve consistency,
but it’s not up to the database alone. Thus, the letter C doesn’t really belong in ACID. i
Isolation
Most databases are accessed by several clients at the same time. That is no problem if
they are reading and writing different parts of the database, but if they are accessing
the same database records, you can run into concurrency problems (race conditions).
Figure 7-1  is a simple example of this kind of problem. Say you have two clients
simultaneously incrementing a counter that is stored in a database. Each client needs
to read the current value, add 1, and write the new value back (assuming there is no
increment operation built into the database). In Figure 7-1 the counter should have
increased from 42 to 44, because two increments happened, but it actually only went
to 43 because of the race condition.
Isolation in the sense of ACID means that concurrently executing transactions are
isolated from each other: they cannot step on each other’s toes. The classic database
textbooks formalize isolation as serializability, which means that each transaction can
pretend that it is the only transaction running on the entire database. The database
ensures that when the transactions have committed, the result is the same as if they
had run serially (one after another), even though in reality they may have run con‐
currently [10].
The Slippery Concept of a Transaction | 225

Figure 7-1. A race condition between two clients concurrently incrementing a counter.
However, in practice, serializable isolation is rarely used, because it carries a perfor‐
mance penalty. Some popular databases, such as Oracle 11g, don’t even implement it.
In Oracle there is an isolation level called “serializable,” but it actually implements
something called snapshot isolation, which is a weaker guarantee than serializability
[8, 11]. We will explore snapshot isolation and other forms of isolation in “Weak Iso‐
lation Levels” on page 233 .
Durability
The purpose of a database system is to provide a safe place where data can be stored
without fear of losing it. Durability is the promise that once a transaction has com‐
mitted successfully, any data it has written will not be forgotten, even if there is a
hardware fault or the database crashes.
In a single-node database, durability typically means that the data has been written to
nonvolatile storage such as a hard drive or SSD. It usually also involves a write-ahead
log or similar (see “Making B-trees reliable” on page 82 ), which allows recovery in the
event that the data structures on disk are corrupted. In a replicated database, durabil‐
ity may mean that the data has been successfully copied to some number of nodes. In
order to provide a durability guarantee, a database must wait until these writes or
replications are complete before reporting a transaction as successfully committed.
As discussed in “Reliability”  on page 6, perfect durability does not exist: if all your
hard disks and all your backups are destroyed at the same time, there’s obviously
nothing your database can do to save you.
226 | Chapter 7: Transactions

Replication and Durability
Historically, durability meant writing to an archive tape. Then it was understood as
writing to a disk or SSD. More recently, it has been adapted to mean replication.
Which implementation is better?
The truth is, nothing is perfect:
• If you write to disk and the machine dies, even though your data isn’t lost, it is
inaccessible until you either fix the machine or transfer the disk to another
machine. Replicated systems can remain available.
• A correlated fault—a power outage or a bug that crashes every node on a particu‐
lar input—can knock out all replicas at once (see “Reliability”  on page 6), losing
any data that is only in memory. Writing to disk is therefore still relevant for in-
memory databases.
• In an asynchronously replicated system, recent writes may be lost when the
leader becomes unavailable (see “Handling Node Outages” on page 156 ).
• When the power is suddenly cut, SSDs in particular have been shown to some‐
times violate the guarantees they are supposed to provide: even fsync isn’t guar‐
anteed to work correctly [ 12]. Disk firmware can have bugs, just like any other
kind of software [13, 14].
• Subtle interactions between the storage engine and the filesystem implementa‐
tion can lead to bugs that are hard to track down, and may cause files on disk to
be corrupted after a crash [15, 16].
• Data on disk can gradually become corrupted without this being detected [ 17]. If
data has been corrupted for some time, replicas and recent backups may also be
corrupted. In this case, you will need to try to restore the data from a historical
backup.
• One study of SSDs found that between 30% and 80% of drives develop at least
one bad block during the first four years of operation [ 18]. Magnetic hard drives
have a lower rate of bad sectors, but a higher rate of complete failure than SSDs.
• If an SSD is disconnected from power, it can start losing data within a few weeks,
depending on the temperature [19].
In practice, there is no one technique that can provide absolute guarantees. There are
only various risk-reduction techniques, including writing to disk, replicating to
remote machines, and backups—and they can and should be used together. As
always, it’s wise to take any theoretical “guarantees” with a healthy grain of salt.
The Slippery Concept of a Transaction | 227

ii. Arguably, an incorrect counter in an email application is not a particularly critical problem. Alternatively,
think of a customer account balance instead of an unread counter, and a payment transaction instead of an
email.
Single-Object and Multi-Object Operations
To recap, in ACID, atomicity and isolation describe what the database should do if a
client makes several writes within the same transaction:
Atomicity
If an error occurs halfway through a sequence of writes, the transaction should
be aborted, and the writes made up to that point should be discarded. In other
words, the database saves you from having to worry about partial failure, by giv‐
ing an all-or-nothing guarantee.
Isolation
Concurrently running transactions shouldn’t interfere with each other. For
example, if one transaction makes several writes, then another transaction should
see either all or none of those writes, but not some subset.
These definitions assume that you want to modify several objects (rows, documents,
records) at once. Such multi-object transactions are often needed if several pieces of
data need to be kept in sync. Figure 7-2 shows an example from an email application.
To display the number of unread messages for a user, you could query something
like:
SELECT COUNT(*) FROM emails WHERE recipient_id = 2 AND unread_flag = true
However, you might find this query to be too slow if there are many emails, and
decide to store the number of unread messages in a separate field (a kind of denorm‐
alization). Now, whenever a new message comes in, you have to increment the
unread counter as well, and whenever a message is marked as read, you also have to
decrement the unread counter.
In Figure 7-2 , user 2 experiences an anomaly: the mailbox listing shows an unread
message, but the counter shows zero unread messages because the counter increment
has not yet happened. ii Isolation would have prevented this issue by ensuring that
user 2 sees either both the inserted email and the updated counter, or neither, but not
an inconsistent halfway point.
228 | Chapter 7: Transactions

iii. This is not ideal. If the TCP connection is interrupted, the transaction must be aborted. If the interruption
happens after the client has requested a commit but before the server acknowledges that the commit hap‐
pened, the client doesn’t know whether the transaction was committed or not. To solve this issue, a transac‐
tion manager can group operations by a unique transaction identifier that is not bound to a particular TCP
connection. We will return to this topic in “The End-to-End Argument for Databases” on page 516 .
Figure 7-2. Violating isolation: one transaction reads another transaction’s uncommit‐
ted writes (a “dirty read”).
Figure 7-3 illustrates the need for atomicity: if an error occurs somewhere over the
course of the transaction, the contents of the mailbox and the unread counter might
become out of sync. In an atomic transaction, if the update to the counter fails, the
transaction is aborted and the inserted email is rolled back.
Figure 7-3. Atomicity ensures that if an error occurs any prior writes from that transac‐
tion are undone, to avoid an inconsistent state.
Multi-object transactions require some way of determining which read and write
operations belong to the same transaction. In relational databases, that is typically
done based on the client’s TCP connection to the database server: on any particular
connection, everything between a BEGIN TRANSACTION  and a COMMIT statement is
considered to be part of the same transaction.iii
The Slippery Concept of a Transaction | 229

iv. Strictly speaking, the term atomic increment uses the word atomic in the sense of multi-threaded pro‐
gramming. In the context of ACID, it should actually be called isolated or serializable increment. But that’s
getting nitpicky.
On the other hand, many nonrelational databases don’t have such a way of grouping
operations together. Even if there is a multi-object API (for example, a key-value
store may have a multi-put operation that updates several keys in one operation), that
doesn’t necessarily mean it has transaction semantics: the command may succeed for
some keys and fail for others, leaving the database in a partially updated state.
Single-object writes
Atomicity and isolation also apply when a single object is being changed. For exam‐
ple, imagine you are writing a 20 KB JSON document to a database:
• If the network connection is interrupted after the first 10 KB have been sent, does
the database store that unparseable 10 KB fragment of JSON?
• If the power fails while the database is in the middle of overwriting the previous
value on disk, do you end up with the old and new values spliced together?
• If another client reads that document while the write is in progress, will it see a
partially updated value?
Those issues would be incredibly confusing, so storage engines almost universally
aim to provide atomicity and isolation on the level of a single object (such as a key-
value pair) on one node. Atomicity can be implemented using a log for crash recov‐
ery (see “Making B-trees reliable” on page 82), and isolation can be implemented
using a lock on each object (allowing only one thread to access an object at any one
time).
Some databases also provide more complex atomic operations,iv such as an increment
operation, which removes the need for a read-modify-write cycle like that in
Figure 7-1. Similarly popular is a compare-and-set operation, which allows a write to
happen only if the value has not been concurrently changed by someone else (see
“Compare-and-set” on page 245 ).
These single-object operations are useful, as they can prevent lost updates when sev‐
eral clients try to write to the same object concurrently (see “Preventing Lost
Updates”  on page 242). However, they are not transactions in the usual sense of the
word. Compare-and-set and other single-object operations have been dubbed “light‐
weight transactions” or even “ACID” for marketing purposes [ 20, 21, 22], but that
terminology is misleading. A transaction is usually understood as a mechanism for
grouping multiple operations on multiple objects into one unit of execution.
230 | Chapter 7: Transactions

The need for multi-object transactions
Many distributed datastores have abandoned multi-object transactions because they
are difficult to implement across partitions, and they can get in the way in some sce‐
narios where very high availability or performance is required. However, there is
nothing that fundamentally prevents transactions in a distributed database, and we
will discuss implementations of distributed transactions in Chapter 9.
But do we need multi-object transactions at all? Would it be possible to implement
any application with only a key-value data model and single-object operations?
There are some use cases in which single-object inserts, updates, and deletes are suffi‐
cient. However, in many other cases writes to several different objects need to be
coordinated:
• In a relational data model, a row in one table often has a foreign key reference to
a row in another table. (Similarly, in a graph-like data model, a vertex has edges
to other vertices.) Multi-object transactions allow you to ensure that these refer‐
ences remain valid: when inserting several records that refer to one another, the
foreign keys have to be correct and up to date, or the data becomes nonsensical.
• In a document data model, the fields that need to be updated together are often
within the same document, which is treated as a single object—no multi-object
transactions are needed when updating a single document. However, document
databases lacking join functionality also encourage denormalization (see “Rela‐
tional Versus Document Databases Today” on page 38). When denormalized
information needs to be updated, like in the example of Figure 7-2, you need to
update several documents in one go. Transactions are very useful in this situation
to prevent denormalized data from going out of sync.
• In databases with secondary indexes (almost everything except pure key-value
stores), the indexes also need to be updated every time you change a value. These
indexes are different database objects from a transaction point of view: for exam‐
ple, without transaction isolation, it’s possible for a record to appear in one index
but not another, because the update to the second index hasn’t happened yet.
Such applications can still be implemented without transactions. However, error han‐
dling becomes much more complicated without atomicity, and the lack of isolation
can cause concurrency problems. We will discuss those in “Weak Isolation Levels” on
page 233, and explore alternative approaches in Chapter 12.
Handling errors and aborts
A key feature of a transaction is that it can be aborted and safely retried if an error
occurred. ACID databases are based on this philosophy: if the database is in danger
The Slippery Concept of a Transaction | 231

of violating its guarantee of atomicity, isolation, or durability, it would rather aban‐
don the transaction entirely than allow it to remain half-finished.
Not all systems follow that philosophy, though. In particular, datastores with leader‐
less replication (see “Leaderless Replication” on page 177) work much more on a
“best effort” basis, which could be summarized as “the database will do as much as it
can, and if it runs into an error, it won’t undo something it has already done”—so it’s
the application’s responsibility to recover from errors.
Errors will inevitably happen, but many software developers prefer to think only
about the happy path rather than the intricacies of error handling. For example, pop‐
ular object-relational mapping (ORM) frameworks such as Rails’s ActiveRecord and
Django don’t retry aborted transactions—the error usually results in an exception
bubbling up the stack, so any user input is thrown away and the user gets an error
message. This is a shame, because the whole point of aborts is to enable safe retries.
Although retrying an aborted transaction is a simple and effective error handling
mechanism, it isn’t perfect:
• If the transaction actually succeeded, but the network failed while the server tried
to acknowledge the successful commit to the client (so the client thinks it failed),
then retrying the transaction causes it to be performed twice—unless you have an
additional application-level deduplication mechanism in place.
• If the error is due to overload, retrying the transaction will make the problem
worse, not better. To avoid such feedback cycles, you can limit the number of
retries, use exponential backoff, and handle overload-related errors differently
from other errors (if possible).
• It is only worth retrying after transient errors (for example due to deadlock, iso‐
lation violation, temporary network interruptions, and failover); after a perma‐
nent error (e.g., constraint violation) a retry would be pointless.
• If the transaction also has side effects outside of the database, those side effects
may happen even if the transaction is aborted. For example, if you’re sending an
email, you wouldn’t want to send the email again every time you retry the trans‐
action. If you want to make sure that several different systems either commit or
abort together, two-phase commit can help (we will discuss this in “Atomic
Commit and Two-Phase Commit (2PC)” on page 354 ).
• If the client process fails while retrying, any data it was trying to write to the
database is lost. 
232 | Chapter 7: Transactions

Weak Isolation Levels
If two transactions don’t touch the same data, they can safely be run in parallel,
because neither depends on the other. Concurrency issues (race conditions) only
come into play when one transaction reads data that is concurrently modified by
another transaction, or when two transactions try to simultaneously modify the same
data.
Concurrency bugs are hard to find by testing, because such bugs are only triggered
when you get unlucky with the timing. Such timing issues might occur very rarely,
and are usually difficult to reproduce. Concurrency is also very difficult to reason
about, especially in a large application where you don’t necessarily know which other
pieces of code are accessing the database. Application development is difficult
enough if you just have one user at a time; having many concurrent users makes it
much harder still, because any piece of data could unexpectedly change at any time.
For that reason, databases have long tried to hide concurrency issues from applica‐
tion developers by providing transaction isolation. In theory, isolation should make
your life easier by letting you pretend that no concurrency is happening: serializable
isolation means that the database guarantees that transactions have the same effect as
if they ran serially (i.e., one at a time, without any concurrency).
In practice, isolation is unfortunately not that simple. Serializable isolation has a per‐
formance cost, and many databases don’t want to pay that price [ 8]. It’s therefore
common for systems to use weaker levels of isolation, which protect against some
concurrency issues, but not all. Those levels of isolation are much harder to under‐
stand, and they can lead to subtle bugs, but they are nevertheless used in practice
[23].
Concurrency bugs caused by weak transaction isolation are not just a theoretical
problem. They have caused substantial loss of money [ 24, 25], led to investigation by
financial auditors [ 26], and caused customer data to be corrupted [ 27]. A popular
comment on revelations of such problems is “Use an ACID database if you’re han‐
dling financial data!”—but that misses the point. Even many popular relational data‐
base systems (which are usually considered “ACID”) use weak isolation, so they
wouldn’t necessarily have prevented these bugs from occurring.
Rather than blindly relying on tools, we need to develop a good understanding of the
kinds of concurrency problems that exist, and how to prevent them. Then we can
build applications that are reliable and correct, using the tools at our disposal.
In this section we will look at several weak (nonserializable) isolation levels that are
used in practice, and discuss in detail what kinds of race conditions can and cannot
occur, so that you can decide what level is appropriate to your application. Once
we’ve done that, we will discuss serializability in detail (see “Serializability”  on page
Weak Isolation Levels | 233

v. Some databases support an even weaker isolation level called read uncommitted. It prevents dirty writes,
but does not prevent dirty reads.
251). Our discussion of isolation levels will be informal, using examples. If you want
rigorous definitions and analyses of their properties, you can find them in the aca‐
demic literature [28, 29, 30].
Read Committed
The most basic level of transaction isolation is read committed.v It makes two guaran‐
tees:
1. When reading from the database, you will only see data that has been committed
(no dirty reads).
2. When writing to the database, you will only overwrite data that has been com‐
mitted (no dirty writes).
Let’s discuss these two guarantees in more detail.
No dirty reads
Imagine a transaction has written some data to the database, but the transaction has
not yet committed or aborted. Can another transaction see that uncommitted data? If
yes, that is called a dirty read [2].
Transactions running at the read committed isolation level must prevent dirty reads.
This means that any writes by a transaction only become visible to others when that
transaction commits (and then all of its writes become visible at once). This is illus‐
trated in Figure 7-4, where user 1 has set x = 3, but user 2’s get x still returns the old
value, 2, while user 1 has not yet committed.
Figure 7-4. No dirty reads: user 2 sees the new value for x only after user 1’s transaction
has committed.
234 | Chapter 7: Transactions

There are a few reasons why it’s useful to prevent dirty reads:
• If a transaction needs to update several objects, a dirty read means that another
transaction may see some of the updates but not others. For example, in
Figure 7-2, the user sees the new unread email but not the updated counter. This
is a dirty read of the email. Seeing the database in a partially updated state is con‐
fusing to users and may cause other transactions to take incorrect decisions.
• If a transaction aborts, any writes it has made need to be rolled back (like in
Figure 7-3). If the database allows dirty reads, that means a transaction may see
data that is later rolled back—i.e., which is never actually committed to the data‐
base. Reasoning about the consequences quickly becomes mind-bending.
No dirty writes
What happens if two transactions concurrently try to update the same object in a
database? We don’t know in which order the writes will happen, but we normally
assume that the later write overwrites the earlier write.
However, what happens if the earlier write is part of a transaction that has not yet
committed, so the later write overwrites an uncommitted value? This is called a dirty
write [28]. Transactions running at the read committed isolation level must prevent
dirty writes, usually by delaying the second write until the first write’s transaction has
committed or aborted.
By preventing dirty writes, this isolation level avoids some kinds of concurrency
problems:
• If transactions update multiple objects, dirty writes can lead to a bad outcome.
For example, consider Figure 7-5 , which illustrates a used car sales website on
which two people, Alice and Bob, are simultaneously trying to buy the same car.
Buying a car requires two database writes: the listing on the website needs to be
updated to reflect the buyer, and the sales invoice needs to be sent to the buyer.
In the case of Figure 7-5 , the sale is awarded to Bob (because he performs the
winning update to the listings table), but the invoice is sent to Alice (because
she performs the winning update to the invoices table). Read committed pre‐
vents such mishaps.
• However, read committed does not prevent the race condition between two
counter increments in Figure 7-1. In this case, the second write happens after the
first transaction has committed, so it’s not a dirty write. It’s still incorrect, but for
a different reason—in “Preventing Lost Updates” on page 242  we will discuss how
to make such counter increments safe.
Weak Isolation Levels | 235

Figure 7-5. With dirty writes, conflicting writes from different transactions can be
mixed up.
Implementing read committed
Read committed is a very popular isolation level. It is the default setting in Oracle
11g, PostgreSQL, SQL Server 2012, MemSQL, and many other databases [8].
Most commonly, databases prevent dirty writes by using row-level locks: when a
transaction wants to modify a particular object (row or document), it must first
acquire a lock on that object. It must then hold that lock until the transaction is com‐
mitted or aborted. Only one transaction can hold the lock for any given object; if
another transaction wants to write to the same object, it must wait until the first
transaction is committed or aborted before it can acquire the lock and continue. This
locking is done automatically by databases in read committed mode (or stronger iso‐
lation levels).
How do we prevent dirty reads? One option would be to use the same lock, and to
require any transaction that wants to read an object to briefly acquire the lock and
then release it again immediately after reading. This would ensure that a read
couldn’t happen while an object has a dirty, uncommitted value (because during that
time the lock would be held by the transaction that has made the write).
However, the approach of requiring read locks does not work well in practice,
because one long-running write transaction can force many read-only transactions to
wait until the long-running transaction has completed. This harms the response time
of read-only transactions and is bad for operability: a slowdown in one part of an
application can have a knock-on effect in a completely different part of the applica‐
tion, due to waiting for locks.
236 | Chapter 7: Transactions

vi. At the time of writing, the only mainstream databases that use locks for read committed isolation are IBM
DB2 and Microsoft SQL Server in the read_committed_snapshot=off configuration [23, 36].
For that reason, most databases vi prevent dirty reads using the approach illustrated in
Figure 7-4: for every object that is written, the database remembers both the old com‐
mitted value and the new value set by the transaction that currently holds the write
lock. While the transaction is ongoing, any other transactions that read the object are
simply given the old value. Only when the new value is committed do transactions
switch over to reading the new value. 
Snapshot Isolation and Repeatable Read
If you look superficially at read committed isolation, you could be forgiven for think‐
ing that it does everything that a transaction needs to do: it allows aborts (required
for atomicity), it prevents reading the incomplete results of transactions, and it pre‐
vents concurrent writes from getting intermingled. Indeed, those are useful features,
and much stronger guarantees than you can get from a system that has no transac‐
tions.
However, there are still plenty of ways in which you can have concurrency bugs when
using this isolation level. For example, Figure 7-6 illustrates a problem that can occur
with read committed.
Figure 7-6. Read skew: Alice observes the database in an inconsistent state.
Say Alice has $1,000 of savings at a bank, split across two accounts with $500 each.
Now a transaction transfers $100 from one of her accounts to the other. If she is
unlucky enough to look at her list of account balances in the same moment as that
transaction is being processed, she may see one account balance at a time before the
Weak Isolation Levels | 237

incoming payment has arrived (with a balance of $500), and the other account after
the outgoing transfer has been made (the new balance being $400). To Alice it now
appears as though she only has a total of $900 in her accounts—it seems that $100 has
vanished into thin air.
This anomaly is called a nonrepeatable read  or read skew : if Alice were to read the
balance of account 1 again at the end of the transaction, she would see a different
value ($600) than she saw in her previous query. Read skew is considered acceptable
under read committed isolation: the account balances that Alice saw were indeed
committed at the time when she read them.
The term skew is unfortunately overloaded: we previously used it in
the sense of an unbalanced workload with hot spots  (see “Skewed
Workloads and Relieving Hot Spots” on page 205), whereas here it
means timing anomaly.
In Alice’s case, this is not a lasting problem, because she will most likely see consis‐
tent account balances if she reloads the online banking website a few seconds later.
However, some situations cannot tolerate such temporary inconsistency:
Backups
Taking a backup requires making a copy of the entire database, which may take
hours on a large database. During the time that the backup process is running,
writes will continue to be made to the database. Thus, you could end up with
some parts of the backup containing an older version of the data, and other parts
containing a newer version. If you need to restore from such a backup, the
inconsistencies (such as disappearing money) become permanent.
Analytic queries and integrity checks
Sometimes, you may want to run a query that scans over large parts of the data‐
base. Such queries are common in analytics (see “Transaction Processing or Ana‐
lytics?”  on page 90), or may be part of a periodic integrity check that everything
is in order (monitoring for data corruption). These queries are likely to return
nonsensical results if they observe parts of the database at different points in
time. 
Snapshot isolation [28] is the most common solution to this problem. The idea is that
each transaction reads from a consistent snapshot of the database—that is, the trans‐
action sees all the data that was committed in the database at the start of the transac‐
tion. Even if the data is subsequently changed by another transaction, each
transaction sees only the old data from that particular point in time.
Snapshot isolation is a boon for long-running, read-only queries such as backups and
analytics. It is very hard to reason about the meaning of a query if the data on which
238 | Chapter 7: Transactions

vii. To be precise, transaction IDs are 32-bit integers, so they overflow after approximately 4 billion transac‐
tions. PostgreSQL’s vacuum process performs cleanup which ensures that overflow does not affect the data.
it operates is changing at the same time as the query is executing. When a transaction
can see a consistent snapshot of the database, frozen at a particular point in time, it is
much easier to understand.
Snapshot isolation is a popular feature: it is supported by PostgreSQL, MySQL with
the InnoDB storage engine, Oracle, SQL Server, and others [23, 31, 32].
Implementing snapshot isolation
Like read committed isolation, implementations of snapshot isolation typically use
write locks to prevent dirty writes (see “Implementing read committed” on page 236 ),
which means that a transaction that makes a write can block the progress of another
transaction that writes to the same object. However, reads do not require any locks.
From a performance point of view, a key principle of snapshot isolation is readers
never block writers, and writers never block readers . This allows a database to handle
long-running read queries on a consistent snapshot at the same time as processing
writes normally, without any lock contention between the two.
To implement snapshot isolation, databases use a generalization of the mechanism
we saw for preventing dirty reads in Figure 7-4. The database must potentially keep
several different committed versions of an object, because various in-progress trans‐
actions may need to see the state of the database at different points in time. Because it
maintains several versions of an object side by side, this technique is known as multi-
version concurrency control (MVCC).
If a database only needed to provide read committed isolation, but not snapshot iso‐
lation, it would be sufficient to keep two versions of an object: the committed version
and the overwritten-but-not-yet-committed version. However, storage engines that
support snapshot isolation typically use MVCC for their read committed isolation
level as well. A typical approach is that read committed uses a separate snapshot for
each query, while snapshot isolation uses the same snapshot for an entire transaction.
Figure 7-7 illustrates how MVCC-based snapshot isolation is implemented in Post‐
greSQL [31] (other implementations are similar). When a transaction is started, it is
given a unique, always-increasing vii transaction ID ( txid). Whenever a transaction
writes anything to the database, the data it writes is tagged with the transaction ID of
the writer.
Weak Isolation Levels | 239

Figure 7-7. Implementing snapshot isolation using multi-version objects.
Each row in a table has a created_by field, containing the ID of the transaction that
inserted this row into the table. Moreover, each row has a deleted_by field, which is
initially empty. If a transaction deletes a row, the row isn’t actually deleted from the
database, but it is marked for deletion by setting the deleted_by field to the ID of the
transaction that requested the deletion. At some later time, when it is certain that no
transaction can any longer access the deleted data, a garbage collection process in the
database removes any rows marked for deletion and frees their space.
An update is internally translated into a delete and a create. For example, in
Figure 7-7, transaction 13 deducts $100 from account 2, changing the balance from
$500 to $400. The accounts table now actually contains two rows for account 2: a
row with a balance of $500 which was marked as deleted by transaction 13, and a row
with a balance of $400 which was created by transaction 13.
Visibility rules for observing a consistent snapshot
When a transaction reads from the database, transaction IDs are used to decide
which objects it can see and which are invisible. By carefully defining visibility rules,
240 | Chapter 7: Transactions

the database can present a consistent snapshot of the database to the application. This
works as follows:
1. At the start of each transaction, the database makes a list of all the other transac‐
tions that are in progress (not yet committed or aborted) at that time. Any writes
that those transactions have made are ignored, even if the transactions subse‐
quently commit.
2. Any writes made by aborted transactions are ignored.
3. Any writes made by transactions with a later transaction ID (i.e., which started
after the current transaction started) are ignored, regardless of whether those
transactions have committed.
4. All other writes are visible to the application’s queries.
These rules apply to both creation and deletion of objects. In Figure 7-7, when trans‐
action 12 reads from account 2, it sees a balance of $500 because the deletion of the
$500 balance was made by transaction 13 (according to rule 3, transaction 12 cannot
see a deletion made by transaction 13), and the creation of the $400 balance is not yet
visible (by the same rule).
Put another way, an object is visible if both of the following conditions are true:
• At the time when the reader’s transaction started, the transaction that created the
object had already committed.
• The object is not marked for deletion, or if it is, the transaction that requested
deletion had not yet committed at the time when the reader’s transaction started.
A long-running transaction may continue using a snapshot for a long time, continu‐
ing to read values that (from other transactions’ point of view) have long been over‐
written or deleted. By never updating values in place but instead creating a new
version every time a value is changed, the database can provide a consistent snapshot
while incurring only a small overhead.
Indexes and snapshot isolation
How do indexes work in a multi-version database? One option is to have the index
simply point to all versions of an object and require an index query to filter out any
object versions that are not visible to the current transaction. When garbage collec‐
tion removes old object versions that are no longer visible to any transaction, the cor‐
responding index entries can also be removed.
In practice, many implementation details determine the performance of multi-
version concurrency control. For example, PostgreSQL has optimizations for avoid‐
ing index updates if different versions of the same object can fit on the same page
[31].
Weak Isolation Levels | 241

Another approach is used in CouchDB, Datomic, and LMDB. Although they also use
B-trees (see “B-Trees”  on page 79), they use an append-only/copy-on-write variant
that does not overwrite pages of the tree when they are updated, but instead creates a
new copy of each modified page. Parent pages, up to the root of the tree, are copied
and updated to point to the new versions of their child pages. Any pages that are not
affected by a write do not need to be copied, and remain immutable [33, 34, 35].
With append-only B-trees, every write transaction (or batch of transactions) creates a
new B-tree root, and a particular root is a consistent snapshot of the database at the
point in time when it was created. There is no need to filter out objects based on
transaction IDs because subsequent writes cannot modify an existing B-tree; they can
only create new tree roots. However, this approach also requires a background pro‐
cess for compaction and garbage collection.
Repeatable read and naming confusion
Snapshot isolation is a useful isolation level, especially for read-only transactions.
However, many databases that implement it call it by different names. In Oracle it is
called serializable, and in PostgreSQL and MySQL it is called repeatable read [23].
The reason for this naming confusion is that the SQL standard doesn’t have the con‐
cept of snapshot isolation, because the standard is based on System R’s 1975 defini‐
tion of isolation levels [ 2] and snapshot isolation hadn’t yet been invented then.
Instead, it defines repeatable read, which looks superficially similar to snapshot isola‐
tion. PostgreSQL and MySQL call their snapshot isolation level repeatable read
because it meets the requirements of the standard, and so they can claim standards
compliance.
Unfortunately, the SQL standard’s definition of isolation levels is flawed—it is ambig‐
uous, imprecise, and not as implementation-independent as a standard should be
[28]. Even though several databases implement repeatable read, there are big differ‐
ences in the guarantees they actually provide, despite being ostensibly standardized
[23]. There has been a formal definition of repeatable read in the research literature
[29, 30], but most implementations don’t satisfy that formal definition. And to top it
off, IBM DB2 uses “repeatable read” to refer to serializability [ 8].
As a result, nobody really knows what repeatable read means. 
Preventing Lost Updates
The read committed and snapshot isolation levels we’ve discussed so far have been
primarily about the guarantees of what a read-only transaction can see in the pres‐
ence of concurrent writes. We have mostly ignored the issue of two transactions writ‐
ing concurrently—we have only discussed dirty writes (see “No dirty writes” on page
235), one particular type of write-write conflict that can occur.
242 | Chapter 7: Transactions

viii. It is possible, albeit fairly complicated, to express the editing of a text document as a stream of atomic
mutations. See “Automatic Conflict Resolution” on page 174  for some pointers.
There are several other interesting kinds of conflicts that can occur between concur‐
rently writing transactions. The best known of these is the lost update problem, illus‐
trated in Figure 7-1 with the example of two concurrent counter increments.
The lost update problem can occur if an application reads some value from the data‐
base, modifies it, and writes back the modified value (a read-modify-write cycle ). If
two transactions do this concurrently, one of the modifications can be lost, because
the second write does not include the first modification. (We sometimes say that the
later write clobbers the earlier write.) This pattern occurs in various different
scenarios:
• Incrementing a counter or updating an account balance (requires reading the
current value, calculating the new value, and writing back the updated value)
• Making a local change to a complex value, e.g., adding an element to a list within
a JSON document (requires parsing the document, making the change, and writ‐
ing back the modified document)
• Two users editing a wiki page at the same time, where each user saves their
changes by sending the entire page contents to the server, overwriting whatever
is currently in the database
Because this is such a common problem, a variety of solutions have been developed.
Atomic write operations
Many databases provide atomic update operations, which remove the need to imple‐
ment read-modify-write cycles in application code. They are usually the best solution
if your code can be expressed in terms of those operations. For example, the follow‐
ing instruction is concurrency-safe in most relational databases:
UPDATE counters SET value = value + 1 WHERE key = 'foo' ;
Similarly, document databases such as MongoDB provide atomic operations for
making local modifications to a part of a JSON document, and Redis provides atomic
operations for modifying data structures such as priority queues. Not all writes can
easily be expressed in terms of atomic operations—for example, updates to a wiki
page involve arbitrary text editing viii—but in situations where atomic operations can
be used, they are usually the best choice.
Atomic operations are usually implemented by taking an exclusive lock on the object
when it is read so that no other transaction can read it until the update has been
Weak Isolation Levels | 243

applied. This technique is sometimes known as cursor stability  [36, 37]. Another
option is to simply force all atomic operations to be executed on a single thread.
Unfortunately, object-relational mapping frameworks make it easy to accidentally
write code that performs unsafe read-modify-write cycles instead of using atomic
operations provided by the database [38]. That’s not a problem if you know what you
are doing, but it is potentially a source of subtle bugs that are difficult to find by
testing.
Explicit locking
Another option for preventing lost updates, if the database’s built-in atomic opera‐
tions don’t provide the necessary functionality, is for the application to explicitly lock
objects that are going to be updated. Then the application can perform a read-
modify-write cycle, and if any other transaction tries to concurrently read the same
object, it is forced to wait until the first read-modify-write cycle has completed.
For example, consider a multiplayer game in which several players can move the
same figure concurrently. In this case, an atomic operation may not be sufficient,
because the application also needs to ensure that a player’s move abides by the rules
of the game, which involves some logic that you cannot sensibly implement as a data‐
base query. Instead, you may use a lock to prevent two players from concurrently
moving the same piece, as illustrated in Example 7-1.
Example 7-1. Explicitly locking rows to prevent lost updates
BEGIN TRANSACTION;
SELECT * FROM figures
  WHERE name = 'robot'  AND game_id = 222
  FOR UPDATE; 
-- Check whether move is valid, then update the position
-- of the piece that was returned by the previous SELECT.
UPDATE figures SET position = 'c4'  WHERE id = 1234;
COMMIT;
The FOR UPDATE clause indicates that the database should take a lock on all rows
returned by this query.
This works, but to get it right, you need to carefully think about your application
logic. It’s easy to forget to add a necessary lock somewhere in the code, and thus
introduce a race condition.
244 | Chapter 7: Transactions


Automatically detecting lost updates
Atomic operations and locks are ways of preventing lost updates by forcing the read-
modify-write cycles to happen sequentially. An alternative is to allow them to execute
in parallel and, if the transaction manager detects a lost update, abort the transaction
and force it to retry its read-modify-write cycle.
An advantage of this approach is that databases can perform this check efficiently in
conjunction with snapshot isolation. Indeed, PostgreSQL’s repeatable read, Oracle’s
serializable, and SQL Server’s snapshot isolation levels automatically detect when a
lost update has occurred and abort the offending transaction. However, MySQL/
InnoDB’s repeatable read does not detect lost updates [ 23]. Some authors [ 28, 30]
argue that a database must prevent lost updates in order to qualify as providing snap‐
shot isolation, so MySQL does not provide snapshot isolation under this definition.
Lost update detection is a great feature, because it doesn’t require application code to
use any special database features—you may forget to use a lock or an atomic opera‐
tion and thus introduce a bug, but lost update detection happens automatically and is
thus less error-prone.
Compare-and-set
In databases that don’t provide transactions, you sometimes find an atomic compare-
and-set operation (previously mentioned in “Single-object writes”  on page 230). The
purpose of this operation is to avoid lost updates by allowing an update to happen
only if the value has not changed since you last read it. If the current value does not
match what you previously read, the update has no effect, and the read-modify-write
cycle must be retried.
For example, to prevent two users concurrently updating the same wiki page, you
might try something like this, expecting the update to occur only if the content of the
page hasn’t changed since the user started editing it:
-- This may or may not be safe, depending on the database implementation
UPDATE wiki_pages SET content = 'new content'
  WHERE id = 1234 AND content = 'old content' ;
If the content has changed and no longer matches 'old content' , this update will
have no effect, so you need to check whether the update took effect and retry if neces‐
sary. However, if the database allows the WHERE clause to read from an old snapshot,
this statement may not prevent lost updates, because the condition may be true even
though another concurrent write is occurring. Check whether your database’s
compare-and-set operation is safe before relying on it.
Weak Isolation Levels | 245

Conflict resolution and replication
In replicated databases (see Chapter 5 ), preventing lost updates takes on another
dimension: since they have copies of the data on multiple nodes, and the data can
potentially be modified concurrently on different nodes, some additional steps need
to be taken to prevent lost updates.
Locks and compare-and-set operations assume that there is a single up-to-date copy
of the data. However, databases with multi-leader or leaderless replication usually
allow several writes to happen concurrently and replicate them asynchronously, so
they cannot guarantee that there is a single up-to-date copy of the data. Thus, techni‐
ques based on locks or compare-and-set do not apply in this context. (We will revisit
this issue in more detail in “Linearizability” on page 324 .)
Instead, as discussed in “Detecting Concurrent Writes” on page 184, a common
approach in such replicated databases is to allow concurrent writes to create several
conflicting versions of a value (also known as siblings), and to use application code or
special data structures to resolve and merge these versions after the fact.
Atomic operations can work well in a replicated context, especially if they are com‐
mutative (i.e., you can apply them in a different order on different replicas, and still
get the same result). For example, incrementing a counter or adding an element to a
set are commutative operations. That is the idea behind Riak 2.0 datatypes, which
prevent lost updates across replicas. When a value is concurrently updated by differ‐
ent clients, Riak automatically merges together the updates in such a way that no
updates are lost [39].
On the other hand, the last write wins (LWW) conflict resolution method is prone to
lost updates, as discussed in “Last write wins (discarding concurrent writes)”  on page
186. Unfortunately, LWW is the default in many replicated databases. 
Write Skew and Phantoms
In the previous sections we saw dirty writes and lost updates, two kinds of race condi‐
tions that can occur when different transactions concurrently try to write to the same
objects. In order to avoid data corruption, those race conditions need to be prevented
—either automatically by the database, or by manual safeguards such as using locks
or atomic write operations.
However, that is not the end of the list of potential race conditions that can occur
between concurrent writes. In this section we will see some subtler examples of
conflicts.
To begin, imagine this example: you are writing an application for doctors to manage
their on-call shifts at a hospital. The hospital usually tries to have several doctors on
call at any one time, but it absolutely must have at least one doctor on call. Doctors
246 | Chapter 7: Transactions

can give up their shifts (e.g., if they are sick themselves), provided that at least one
colleague remains on call in that shift [40, 41].
Now imagine that Alice and Bob are the two on-call doctors for a particular shift.
Both are feeling unwell, so they both decide to request leave. Unfortunately, they
happen to click the button to go off call at approximately the same time. What hap‐
pens next is illustrated in Figure 7-8.
Figure 7-8. Example of write skew causing an application bug.
In each transaction, your application first checks that two or more doctors are cur‐
rently on call; if yes, it assumes it’s safe for one doctor to go off call. Since the data‐
base is using snapshot isolation, both checks return 2, so both transactions proceed to
the next stage. Alice updates her own record to take herself off call, and Bob updates
his own record likewise. Both transactions commit, and now no doctor is on call.
Your requirement of having at least one doctor on call has been violated.
Characterizing write skew
This anomaly is called write skew [28]. It is neither a dirty write nor a lost update,
because the two transactions are updating two different objects (Alice’s and Bob’s on-
call records, respectively). It is less obvious that a conflict occurred here, but it’s defi‐
nitely a race condition: if the two transactions had run one after another, the second
Weak Isolation Levels | 247

doctor would have been prevented from going off call. The anomalous behavior was
only possible because the transactions ran concurrently.
You can think of write skew as a generalization of the lost update problem. Write
skew can occur if two transactions read the same objects, and then update some of
those objects (different transactions may update different objects). In the special case
where different transactions update the same object, you get a dirty write or lost
update anomaly (depending on the timing).
We saw that there are various different ways of preventing lost updates. With write
skew, our options are more restricted:
• Atomic single-object operations don’t help, as multiple objects are involved.
• The automatic detection of lost updates that you find in some implementations
of snapshot isolation unfortunately doesn’t help either: write skew is not auto‐
matically detected in PostgreSQL’s repeatable read, MySQL/InnoDB’s repeatable
read, Oracle’s serializable, or SQL Server’s snapshot isolation level [ 23]. Auto‐
matically preventing write skew requires true serializable isolation (see “Serializa‐
bility” on page 251 ).
• Some databases allow you to configure constraints, which are then enforced by
the database (e.g., uniqueness, foreign key constraints, or restrictions on a partic‐
ular value). However, in order to specify that at least one doctor must be on call,
you would need a constraint that involves multiple objects. Most databases do
not have built-in support for such constraints, but you may be able to implement
them with triggers or materialized views, depending on the database [42].
• If you can’t use a serializable isolation level, the second-best option in this case is
probably to explicitly lock the rows that the transaction depends on. In the doc‐
tors example, you could write something like the following:
BEGIN TRANSACTION;
SELECT * FROM doctors
  WHERE on_call = true
  AND shift_id = 1234 FOR UPDATE; 
UPDATE doctors
  SET on_call = false
  WHERE name = 'Alice'
  AND shift_id = 1234;
COMMIT;
As before, FOR UPDATE  tells the database to lock all rows returned by this
query.
248 | Chapter 7: Transactions


ix. In PostgreSQL you can do this more elegantly using range types, but they are not widely supported in
other databases.
More examples of write skew
Write skew may seem like an esoteric issue at first, but once you’re aware of it, you
may notice more situations in which it can occur. Here are some more examples:
Meeting room booking system
Say you want to enforce that there cannot be two bookings for the same meeting
room at the same time [ 43]. When someone wants to make a booking, you first
check for any conflicting bookings (i.e., bookings for the same room with an
overlapping time range), and if none are found, you create the meeting (see
Example 7-2).ix
Example 7-2. A meeting room booking system tries to avoid double-booking (not
safe under snapshot isolation)
BEGIN TRANSACTION;
-- Check for any existing bookings that overlap with the period of noon-1pm
SELECT COUNT(*) FROM bookings
  WHERE room_id = 123 AND
    end_time > '2015-01-01 12:00'  AND start_time < '2015-01-01 13:00' ;
-- If the previous query returned zero:
INSERT INTO bookings
  (room_id, start_time, end_time, user_id)
  VALUES (123, '2015-01-01 12:00' , '2015-01-01 13:00' , 666);
COMMIT;
Unfortunately, snapshot isolation does not prevent another user from concur‐
rently inserting a conflicting meeting. In order to guarantee you won’t get sched‐
uling conflicts, you once again need serializable isolation.
Multiplayer game
In Example 7-1, we used a lock to prevent lost updates (that is, making sure that
two players can’t move the same figure at the same time). However, the lock
doesn’t prevent players from moving two different figures to the same position
on the board or potentially making some other move that violates the rules of the
game. Depending on the kind of rule you are enforcing, you might be able to use
a unique constraint, but otherwise you’re vulnerable to write skew.
Weak Isolation Levels | 249

Claiming a username
On a website where each user has a unique username, two users may try to create
accounts with the same username at the same time. You may use a transaction to
check whether a name is taken and, if not, create an account with that name.
However, like in the previous examples, that is not safe under snapshot isolation.
Fortunately, a unique constraint is a simple solution here (the second transaction
that tries to register the username will be aborted due to violating the constraint).
Preventing double-spending
A service that allows users to spend money or points needs to check that a user
doesn’t spend more than they have. You might implement this by inserting a ten‐
tative spending item into a user’s account, listing all the items in the account, and
checking that the sum is positive [ 44]. With write skew, it could happen that two
spending items are inserted concurrently that together cause the balance to go
negative, but that neither transaction notices the other.
Phantoms causing write skew
All of these examples follow a similar pattern:
1. A SELECT query checks whether some requirement is satisfied by searching for
rows that match some search condition (there are at least two doctors on call,
there are no existing bookings for that room at that time, the position on the
board doesn’t already have another figure on it, the username isn’t already taken,
there is still money in the account).
2. Depending on the result of the first query, the application code decides how to
continue (perhaps to go ahead with the operation, or perhaps to report an error
to the user and abort).
3. If the application decides to go ahead, it makes a write ( INSERT, UPDATE, or
DELETE) to the database and commits the transaction.
The effect of this write changes the precondition of the decision of step 2. In
other words, if you were to repeat the SELECT query from step 1 after commiting
the write, you would get a different result, because the write changed the set of
rows matching the search condition (there is now one fewer doctor on call, the
meeting room is now booked for that time, the position on the board is now
taken by the figure that was moved, the username is now taken, there is now less
money in the account).
The steps may occur in a different order. For example, you could first make the write,
then the SELECT query, and finally decide whether to abort or commit based on the
result of the query.
250 | Chapter 7: Transactions

In the case of the doctor on call example, the row being modified in step 3 was one of
the rows returned in step 1, so we could make the transaction safe and avoid write
skew by locking the rows in step 1 ( SELECT FOR UPDATE ). However, the other four
examples are different: they check for the absence of rows matching some search con‐
dition, and the write adds a row matching the same condition. If the query in step 1
doesn’t return any rows, SELECT FOR UPDATE can’t attach locks to anything.
This effect, where a write in one transaction changes the result of a search query in
another transaction, is called a phantom [3]. Snapshot isolation avoids phantoms in
read-only queries, but in read-write transactions like the examples we discussed,
phantoms can lead to particularly tricky cases of write skew. 
Materializing conflicts
If the problem of phantoms is that there is no object to which we can attach the locks,
perhaps we can artificially introduce a lock object into the database?
For example, in the meeting room booking case you could imagine creating a table of
time slots and rooms. Each row in this table corresponds to a particular room for a
particular time period (say, 15 minutes). You create rows for all possible combina‐
tions of rooms and time periods ahead of time, e.g. for the next six months.
Now a transaction that wants to create a booking can lock ( SELECT FOR UPDATE) the
rows in the table that correspond to the desired room and time period. After it has
acquired the locks, it can check for overlapping bookings and insert a new booking as
before. Note that the additional table isn’t used to store information about the book‐
ing—it’s purely a collection of locks which is used to prevent bookings on the same
room and time range from being modified concurrently.
This approach is called materializing conflicts, because it takes a phantom and turns it
into a lock conflict on a concrete set of rows that exist in the database [ 11]. Unfortu‐
nately, it can be hard and error-prone to figure out how to materialize conflicts, and
it’s ugly to let a concurrency control mechanism leak into the application data model.
For those reasons, materializing conflicts should be considered a last resort if no
alternative is possible. A serializable isolation level is much preferable in most cases. 
Serializability
In this chapter we have seen several examples of transactions that are prone to race
conditions. Some race conditions are prevented by the read committed and snapshot
isolation levels, but others are not. We encountered some particularly tricky exam‐
ples with write skew and phantoms. It’s a sad situation:
• Isolation levels are hard to understand, and inconsistently implemented in differ‐
ent databases (e.g., the meaning of “repeatable read” varies significantly).
Serializability | 251