• If you look at your application code, it’s difficult to tell whether it is safe to run at
a particular isolation level—especially in a large application, where you might not
be aware of all the things that may be happening concurrently.
• There are no good tools to help us detect race conditions. In principle, static
analysis may help [26], but research techniques have not yet found their way into
practical use. Testing for concurrency issues is hard, because they are usually
nondeterministic—problems only occur if you get unlucky with the timing.
This is not a new problem—it has been like this since the 1970s, when weak isolation
levels were first introduced [ 2]. All along, the answer from researchers has been sim‐
ple: use serializable isolation!
Serializable isolation is usually regarded as the strongest isolation level. It guarantees
that even though transactions may execute in parallel, the end result is the same as if
they had executed one at a time, serially, without any concurrency. Thus, the database
guarantees that if the transactions behave correctly when run individually, they con‐
tinue to be correct when run concurrently—in other words, the database prevents all
possible race conditions.
But if serializable isolation is so much better than the mess of weak isolation levels,
then why isn’t everyone using it? To answer this question, we need to look at the
options for implementing serializability, and how they perform. Most databases that
provide serializability today use one of three techniques, which we will explore in the
rest of this chapter:
• Literally executing transactions in a serial order (see “Actual Serial Execution” on
page 252)
• Two-phase locking (see “Two-Phase Locking (2PL)” on page 257 ), which for sev‐
eral decades was the only viable option
• Optimistic concurrency control techniques such as serializable snapshot isolation
(see “Serializable Snapshot Isolation (SSI)” on page 261 )
For now, we will discuss these techniques primarily in the context of single-node
databases; in Chapter 9 we will examine how they can be generalized to transactions
that involve multiple nodes in a distributed system.
Actual Serial Execution
The simplest way of avoiding concurrency problems is to remove the concurrency
entirely: to execute only one transaction at a time, in serial order, on a single thread.
By doing so, we completely sidestep the problem of detecting and preventing con‐
flicts between transactions: the resulting isolation is by definition serializable.
252 | Chapter 7: Transactions

Even though this seems like an obvious idea, database designers only fairly recently—
around 2007—decided that a single-threaded loop for executing transactions was fea‐
sible [ 45]. If multi-threaded concurrency was considered essential for getting good
performance during the previous 30 years, what changed to make single-threaded
execution possible?
Two developments caused this rethink:
• RAM became cheap enough that for many use cases is now feasible to keep the
entire active dataset in memory (see “Keeping everything in memory” on page
88). When all data that a transaction needs to access is in memory, transactions
can execute much faster than if they have to wait for data to be loaded from disk.
• Database designers realized that OLTP transactions are usually short and only
make a small number of reads and writes (see “Transaction Processing or Ana‐
lytics?” on page 90 ). By contrast, long-running analytic queries are typically read-
only, so they can be run on a consistent snapshot (using snapshot isolation)
outside of the serial execution loop.
The approach of executing transactions serially is implemented in VoltDB/H-Store,
Redis, and Datomic [46, 47, 48]. A system designed for single-threaded execution can
sometimes perform better than a system that supports concurrency, because it can
avoid the coordination overhead of locking. However, its throughput is limited to
that of a single CPU core. In order to make the most of that single thread, transac‐
tions need to be structured differently from their traditional form.
Encapsulating transactions in stored procedures
In the early days of databases, the intention was that a database transaction could
encompass an entire flow of user activity. For example, booking an airline ticket is a
multi-stage process (searching for routes, fares, and available seats; deciding on an
itinerary; booking seats on each of the flights of the itinerary; entering passenger
details; making payment). Database designers thought that it would be neat if that
entire process was one transaction so that it could be committed atomically.
Unfortunately, humans are very slow to make up their minds and respond. If a data‐
base transaction needs to wait for input from a user, the database needs to support a
potentially huge number of concurrent transactions, most of them idle. Most data‐
bases cannot do that efficiently, and so almost all OLTP applications keep transac‐
tions short by avoiding interactively waiting for a user within a transaction. On the
web, this means that a transaction is committed within the same HTTP request—a
transaction does not span multiple requests. A new HTTP request starts a new trans‐
action.
Even though the human has been taken out of the critical path, transactions have
continued to be executed in an interactive client/server style, one statement at a time.
Serializability | 253

An application makes a query, reads the result, perhaps makes another query
depending on the result of the first query, and so on. The queries and results are sent
back and forth between the application code (running on one machine) and the data‐
base server (on another machine).
In this interactive style of transaction, a lot of time is spent in network communica‐
tion between the application and the database. If you were to disallow concurrency in
the database and only process one transaction at a time, the throughput would be
dreadful because the database would spend most of its time waiting for the applica‐
tion to issue the next query for the current transaction. In this kind of database, it’s
necessary to process multiple transactions concurrently in order to get reasonable
performance.
For this reason, systems with single-threaded serial transaction processing don’t
allow interactive multi-statement transactions. Instead, the application must submit
the entire transaction code to the database ahead of time, as a stored procedure. The
differences between these approaches is illustrated in Figure 7-9 . Provided that all
data required by a transaction is in memory, the stored procedure can execute very
fast, without waiting for any network or disk I/O.
Figure 7-9. The difference between an interactive transaction and a stored procedure
(using the example transaction of Figure 7-8).
254 | Chapter 7: Transactions

Pros and cons of stored procedures
Stored procedures have existed for some time in relational databases, and they have
been part of the SQL standard (SQL/PSM) since 1999. They have gained a somewhat
bad reputation, for various reasons:
• Each database vendor has its own language for stored procedures (Oracle has PL/
SQL, SQL Server has T-SQL, PostgreSQL has PL/pgSQL, etc.). These languages
haven’t kept up with developments in general-purpose programming languages,
so they look quite ugly and archaic from today’s point of view, and they lack the
ecosystem of libraries that you find with most programming languages.
• Code running in a database is difficult to manage: compared to an application
server, it’s harder to debug, more awkward to keep in version control and deploy,
trickier to test, and difficult to integrate with a metrics collection system for
monitoring.
• A database is often much more performance-sensitive than an application server,
because a single database instance is often shared by many application servers. A
badly written stored procedure (e.g., using a lot of memory or CPU time) in a
database can cause much more trouble than equivalent badly written code in an
application server.
However, those issues can be overcome. Modern implementations of stored proce‐
dures have abandoned PL/SQL and use existing general-purpose programming lan‐
guages instead: VoltDB uses Java or Groovy, Datomic uses Java or Clojure, and Redis
uses Lua.
With stored procedures and in-memory data, executing all transactions on a single
thread becomes feasible. As they don’t need to wait for I/O and they avoid the over‐
head of other concurrency control mechanisms, they can achieve quite good
throughput on a single thread.
VoltDB also uses stored procedures for replication: instead of copying a transaction’s
writes from one node to another, it executes the same stored procedure on each rep‐
lica. VoltDB therefore requires that stored procedures are deterministic (when run on
different nodes, they must produce the same result). If a transaction needs to use the
current date and time, for example, it must do so through special deterministic APIs. 
Partitioning
Executing all transactions serially makes concurrency control much simpler, but lim‐
its the transaction throughput of the database to the speed of a single CPU core on a
single machine. Read-only transactions may execute elsewhere, using snapshot isola‐
tion, but for applications with high write throughput, the single-threaded transaction
processor can become a serious bottleneck.
Serializability | 255

x. If a transaction needs to access data that’s not in memory, the best solution may be to abort the transac‐
tion, asynchronously fetch the data into memory while continuing to process other transactions, and then
restart the transaction when the data has been loaded. This approach is known as anti-caching, as previously
mentioned in “Keeping everything in memory” on page 88 .
In order to scale to multiple CPU cores, and multiple nodes, you can potentially par‐
tition your data (see Chapter 6), which is supported in VoltDB. If you can find a way
of partitioning your dataset so that each transaction only needs to read and write data
within a single partition, then each partition can have its own transaction processing
thread running independently from the others. In this case, you can give each CPU
core its own partition, which allows your transaction throughput to scale linearly
with the number of CPU cores [47].
However, for any transaction that needs to access multiple partitions, the database
must coordinate the transaction across all the partitions that it touches. The stored
procedure needs to be performed in lock-step across all partitions to ensure serializa‐
bility across the whole system.
Since cross-partition transactions have additional coordination overhead, they are
vastly slower than single-partition transactions. VoltDB reports a throughput of
about 1,000 cross-partition writes per second, which is orders of magnitude below its
single-partition throughput and cannot be increased by adding more machines [49].
Whether transactions can be single-partition depends very much on the structure of
the data used by the application. Simple key-value data can often be partitioned very
easily, but data with multiple secondary indexes is likely to require a lot of cross-
partition coordination (see “Partitioning and Secondary Indexes” on page 206 ).
Summary of serial execution
Serial execution of transactions has become a viable way of achieving serializable iso‐
lation within certain constraints:
• Every transaction must be small and fast, because it takes only one slow transac‐
tion to stall all transaction processing.
• It is limited to use cases where the active dataset can fit in memory. Rarely
accessed data could potentially be moved to disk, but if it needed to be accessed
in a single-threaded transaction, the system would get very slow.x
• Write throughput must be low enough to be handled on a single CPU core, or
else transactions need to be partitioned without requiring cross-partition coordi‐
nation.
• Cross-partition transactions are possible, but there is a hard limit to the extent to
which they can be used. 
256 | Chapter 7: Transactions

xi. Sometimes called strong strict two-phase locking (SS2PL) to distinguish it from other variants of 2PL.
Two-Phase Locking (2PL)
For around 30 years, there was only one widely used algorithm for serializability in
databases: two-phase locking (2PL).xi
2PL is not 2PC
Note that while two-phase locking (2PL) sounds very similar to
two-phase commit (2PC), they are completely different things. We
will discuss 2PC in Chapter 9.
We saw previously that locks are often used to prevent dirty writes (see “No dirty
writes” on page 235): if two transactions concurrently try to write to the same object,
the lock ensures that the second writer must wait until the first one has finished its
transaction (aborted or committed) before it may continue.
Two-phase locking is similar, but makes the lock requirements much stronger. Sev‐
eral transactions are allowed to concurrently read the same object as long as nobody
is writing to it. But as soon as anyone wants to write (modify or delete) an object,
exclusive access is required:
• If transaction A has read an object and transaction B wants to write to that
object, B must wait until A commits or aborts before it can continue. (This
ensures that B can’t change the object unexpectedly behind A’s back.)
• If transaction A has written an object and transaction B wants to read that object,
B must wait until A commits or aborts before it can continue. (Reading an old
version of the object, like in Figure 7-1, is not acceptable under 2PL.)
In 2PL, writers don’t just block other writers; they also block readers and vice versa.
Snapshot isolation has the mantra readers never block writers, and writers never block
readers (see “Implementing snapshot isolation” on page 239 ), which captures this key
difference between snapshot isolation and two-phase locking. On the other hand,
because 2PL provides serializability, it protects against all the race conditions dis‐
cussed earlier, including lost updates and write skew.
Implementation of two-phase locking
2PL is used by the serializable isolation level in MySQL (InnoDB) and SQL Server,
and the repeatable read isolation level in DB2 [23, 36].
Serializability | 257

The blocking of readers and writers is implemented by a having a lock on each object
in the database. The lock can either be in shared mode or in exclusive mode. The lock
is used as follows:
• If a transaction wants to read an object, it must first acquire the lock in shared
mode. Several transactions are allowed to hold the lock in shared mode simulta‐
neously, but if another transaction already has an exclusive lock on the object,
these transactions must wait.
• If a transaction wants to write to an object, it must first acquire the lock in exclu‐
sive mode. No other transaction may hold the lock at the same time (either in
shared or in exclusive mode), so if there is any existing lock on the object, the
transaction must wait.
• If a transaction first reads and then writes an object, it may upgrade its shared
lock to an exclusive lock. The upgrade works the same as getting an exclusive
lock directly.
• After a transaction has acquired the lock, it must continue to hold the lock until
the end of the transaction (commit or abort). This is where the name “two-
phase” comes from: the first phase (while the transaction is executing) is when
the locks are acquired, and the second phase (at the end of the transaction) is
when all the locks are released.
Since so many locks are in use, it can happen quite easily that transaction A is stuck
waiting for transaction B to release its lock, and vice versa. This situation is called
deadlock. The database automatically detects deadlocks between transactions and
aborts one of them so that the others can make progress. The aborted transaction
needs to be retried by the application.
Performance of two-phase locking
The big downside of two-phase locking, and the reason why it hasn’t been used by
everybody since the 1970s, is performance: transaction throughput and response
times of queries are significantly worse under two-phase locking than under weak
isolation.
This is partly due to the overhead of acquiring and releasing all those locks, but more
importantly due to reduced concurrency. By design, if two concurrent transactions
try to do anything that may in any way result in a race condition, one has to wait for
the other to complete.
Traditional relational databases don’t limit the duration of a transaction, because
they are designed for interactive applications that wait for human input. Conse‐
quently, when one transaction has to wait on another, there is no limit on how long it
may have to wait. Even if you make sure that you keep all your transactions short, a
258 | Chapter 7: Transactions

queue may form if several transactions want to access the same object, so a transac‐
tion may have to wait for several others to complete before it can do anything.
For this reason, databases running 2PL can have quite unstable latencies, and they
can be very slow at high percentiles (see “Describing Performance” on page 13) if
there is contention in the workload. It may take just one slow transaction, or one
transaction that accesses a lot of data and acquires many locks, to cause the rest of the
system to grind to a halt. This instability is problematic when robust operation is
required.
Although deadlocks can happen with the lock-based read committed isolation level,
they occur much more frequently under 2PL serializable isolation (depending on the
access patterns of your transaction). This can be an additional performance problem:
when a transaction is aborted due to deadlock and is retried, it needs to do its work
all over again. If deadlocks are frequent, this can mean significant wasted effort.
Predicate locks
In the preceding description of locks, we glossed over a subtle but important detail.
In “Phantoms causing write skew” on page 250 we discussed the problem of phan‐
toms—that is, one transaction changing the results of another transaction’s search
query. A database with serializable isolation must prevent phantoms.
In the meeting room booking example this means that if one transaction has
searched for existing bookings for a room within a certain time window (see
Example 7-2 ), another transaction is not allowed to concurrently insert or update
another booking for the same room and time range. (It’s okay to concurrently insert
bookings for other rooms, or for the same room at a different time that doesn’t affect
the proposed booking.)
How do we implement this? Conceptually, we need a predicate lock [3]. It works sim‐
ilarly to the shared/exclusive lock described earlier, but rather than belonging to a
particular object (e.g., one row in a table), it belongs to all objects that match some
search condition, such as:
SELECT * FROM bookings
  WHERE room_id = 123 AND
    end_time   > '2018-01-01 12:00'  AND
    start_time < '2018-01-01 13:00' ;
A predicate lock restricts access as follows:
• If transaction A wants to read objects matching some condition, like in that
SELECT query, it must acquire a shared-mode predicate lock on the conditions of
the query. If another transaction B currently has an exclusive lock on any object
matching those conditions, A must wait until B releases its lock before it is
allowed to make its query.
Serializability | 259

• If transaction A wants to insert, update, or delete any object, it must first check
whether either the old or the new value matches any existing predicate lock. If
there is a matching predicate lock held by transaction B, then A must wait until B
has committed or aborted before it can continue.
The key idea here is that a predicate lock applies even to objects that do not yet exist
in the database, but which might be added in the future (phantoms). If two-phase
locking includes predicate locks, the database prevents all forms of write skew and
other race conditions, and so its isolation becomes serializable.
Index-range locks
Unfortunately, predicate locks do not perform well: if there are many locks by active
transactions, checking for matching locks becomes time-consuming. For that reason,
most databases with 2PL actually implement index-range locking (also known as next-
key locking), which is a simplified approximation of predicate locking [41, 50].
It’s safe to simplify a predicate by making it match a greater set of objects. For exam‐
ple, if you have a predicate lock for bookings of room 123 between noon and 1 p.m.,
you can approximate it by locking bookings for room 123 at any time, or you can
approximate it by locking all rooms (not just room 123) between noon and 1 p.m.
This is safe, because any write that matches the original predicate will definitely also
match the approximations.
In the room bookings database you would probably have an index on the room_id
column, and/or indexes on start_time and end_time (otherwise the preceding query
would be very slow on a large database):
• Say your index is on room_id, and the database uses this index to find existing
bookings for room 123. Now the database can simply attach a shared lock to this
index entry, indicating that a transaction has searched for bookings of room 123.
• Alternatively, if the database uses a time-based index to find existing bookings, it
can attach a shared lock to a range of values in that index, indicating that a trans‐
action has searched for bookings that overlap with the time period of noon to 1
p.m. on January 1, 2018.
Either way, an approximation of the search condition is attached to one of the
indexes. Now, if another transaction wants to insert, update, or delete a booking for
the same room and/or an overlapping time period, it will have to update the same
part of the index. In the process of doing so, it will encounter the shared lock, and it
will be forced to wait until the lock is released.
This provides effective protection against phantoms and write skew. Index-range
locks are not as precise as predicate locks would be (they may lock a bigger range of
260 | Chapter 7: Transactions

objects than is strictly necessary to maintain serializability), but since they have much
lower overheads, they are a good compromise.
If there is no suitable index where a range lock can be attached, the database can fall
back to a shared lock on the entire table. This will not be good for performance, since
it will stop all other transactions writing to the table, but it’s a safe fallback position. 
Serializable Snapshot Isolation (SSI)
This chapter has painted a bleak picture of concurrency control in databases. On the
one hand, we have implementations of serializability that don’t perform well (two-
phase locking) or don’t scale well (serial execution). On the other hand, we have weak
isolation levels that have good performance, but are prone to various race conditions
(lost updates, write skew, phantoms, etc.). Are serializable isolation and good perfor‐
mance fundamentally at odds with each other?
Perhaps not: an algorithm called serializable snapshot isolation  (SSI) is very promis‐
ing. It provides full serializability, but has only a small performance penalty com‐
pared to snapshot isolation. SSI is fairly new: it was first described in 2008 [ 40] and is
the subject of Michael Cahill’s PhD thesis [ 51].
Today SSI is used both in single-node databases (the serializable isolation level in
PostgreSQL since version 9.1 [ 41]) and distributed databases (FoundationDB uses a
similar algorithm). As SSI is so young compared to other concurrency control mech‐
anisms, it is still proving its performance in practice, but it has the possibility of being
fast enough to become the new default in the future.
Pessimistic versus optimistic concurrency control
Two-phase locking is a so-called pessimistic concurrency control mechanism: it is
based on the principle that if anything might possibly go wrong (as indicated by a
lock held by another transaction), it’s better to wait until the situation is safe again
before doing anything. It is like mutual exclusion, which is used to protect data struc‐
tures in multi-threaded programming.
Serial execution is, in a sense, pessimistic to the extreme: it is essentially equivalent to
each transaction having an exclusive lock on the entire database (or one partition of
the database) for the duration of the transaction. We compensate for the pessimism
by making each transaction very fast to execute, so it only needs to hold the “lock” for
a short time.
By contrast, serializable snapshot isolation is an optimistic concurrency control tech‐
nique. Optimistic in this context means that instead of blocking if something poten‐
tially dangerous happens, transactions continue anyway, in the hope that everything
will turn out all right. When a transaction wants to commit, the database checks
whether anything bad happened (i.e., whether isolation was violated); if so, the trans‐
Serializability | 261

action is aborted and has to be retried. Only transactions that executed serializably
are allowed to commit.
Optimistic concurrency control is an old idea [ 52], and its advantages and disadvan‐
tages have been debated for a long time [ 53]. It performs badly if there is high con‐
tention (many transactions trying to access the same objects), as this leads to a high
proportion of transactions needing to abort. If the system is already close to its maxi‐
mum throughput, the additional transaction load from retried transactions can make
performance worse.
However, if there is enough spare capacity, and if contention between transactions is
not too high, optimistic concurrency control techniques tend to perform better than
pessimistic ones. Contention can be reduced with commutative atomic operations:
for example, if several transactions concurrently want to increment a counter, it
doesn’t matter in which order the increments are applied (as long as the counter isn’t
read in the same transaction), so the concurrent increments can all be applied
without conflicting.
As the name suggests, SSI is based on snapshot isolation—that is, all reads within a
transaction are made from a consistent snapshot of the database (see “Snapshot Isola‐
tion and Repeatable Read” on page 237 ). This is the main difference compared to ear‐
lier optimistic concurrency control techniques. On top of snapshot isolation, SSI adds
an algorithm for detecting serialization conflicts among writes and determining
which transactions to abort.
Decisions based on an outdated premise
When we previously discussed write skew in snapshot isolation (see “Write Skew and
Phantoms”  on page 246), we observed a recurring pattern: a transaction reads some
data from the database, examines the result of the query, and decides to take some
action (write to the database) based on the result that it saw. However, under snap‐
shot isolation, the result from the original query may no longer be up-to-date by the
time the transaction commits, because the data may have been modified in the mean‐
time.
Put another way, the transaction is taking an action based on a premise (a fact that
was true at the beginning of the transaction, e.g., “There are currently two doctors on
call”). Later, when the transaction wants to commit, the original data may have
changed—the premise may no longer be true.
When the application makes a query (e.g., “How many doctors are currently on
call?”), the database doesn’t know how the application logic uses the result of that
query. To be safe, the database needs to assume that any change in the query result
(the premise) means that writes in that transaction may be invalid. In other words,
there may be a causal dependency between the queries and the writes in the transac‐
tion. In order to provide serializable isolation, the database must detect situations in
262 | Chapter 7: Transactions

which a transaction may have acted on an outdated premise and abort the transac‐
tion in that case.
How does the database know if a query result might have changed? There are two
cases to consider:
• Detecting reads of a stale MVCC object version (uncommitted write occurred
before the read)
• Detecting writes that affect prior reads (the write occurs after the read)
Detecting stale MVCC reads
Recall that snapshot isolation is usually implemented by multi-version concurrency
control (MVCC; see Figure 7-10). When a transaction reads from a consistent snap‐
shot in an MVCC database, it ignores writes that were made by any other transac‐
tions that hadn’t yet committed at the time when the snapshot was taken. In
Figure 7-10, transaction 43 sees Alice as having on_call = true, because transaction
42 (which modified Alice’s on-call status) is uncommitted. However, by the time
transaction 43 wants to commit, transaction 42 has already committed. This means
that the write that was ignored when reading from the consistent snapshot has now
taken effect, and transaction 43’s premise is no longer true.
Figure 7-10. Detecting when a transaction reads outdated values from an MVCC
snapshot.
Serializability | 263

In order to prevent this anomaly, the database needs to track when a transaction
ignores another transaction’s writes due to MVCC visibility rules. When the transac‐
tion wants to commit, the database checks whether any of the ignored writes have
now been committed. If so, the transaction must be aborted.
Why wait until committing? Why not abort transaction 43 immediately when the
stale read is detected? Well, if transaction 43 was a read-only transaction, it wouldn’t
need to be aborted, because there is no risk of write skew. At the time when transac‐
tion 43 makes its read, the database doesn’t yet know whether that transaction is
going to later perform a write. Moreover, transaction 42 may yet abort or may still be
uncommitted at the time when transaction 43 is committed, and so the read may
turn out not to have been stale after all. By avoiding unnecessary aborts, SSI preserves
snapshot isolation’s support for long-running reads from a consistent snapshot.
Detecting writes that affect prior reads
The second case to consider is when another transaction modifies data after it has
been read. This case is illustrated in Figure 7-11.
Figure 7-11. In serializable snapshot isolation, detecting when one transaction modifies
another transaction’s reads.
In the context of two-phase locking we discussed index-range locks (see “Index-range
locks”  on page 260), which allow the database to lock access to all rows matching
some search query, such as WHERE shift_id = 1234. We can use a similar technique
here, except that SSI locks don’t block other transactions.
264 | Chapter 7: Transactions

In Figure 7-11 , transactions 42 and 43 both search for on-call doctors during shift
1234. If there is an index on shift_id, the database can use the index entry 1234 to
record the fact that transactions 42 and 43 read this data. (If there is no index, this
information can be tracked at the table level.) This information only needs to be kept
for a while: after a transaction has finished (committed or aborted), and all concur‐
rent transactions have finished, the database can forget what data it read.
When a transaction writes to the database, it must look in the indexes for any other
transactions that have recently read the affected data. This process is similar to
acquiring a write lock on the affected key range, but rather than blocking until the
readers have committed, the lock acts as a tripwire: it simply notifies the transactions
that the data they read may no longer be up to date.
In Figure 7-11, transaction 43 notifies transaction 42 that its prior read is outdated,
and vice versa. Transaction 42 is first to commit, and it is successful: although trans‐
action 43’s write affected 42, 43 hasn’t yet committed, so the write has not yet taken
effect. However, when transaction 43 wants to commit, the conflicting write from 42
has already been committed, so 43 must abort. 
Performance of serializable snapshot isolation
As always, many engineering details affect how well an algorithm works in practice.
For example, one trade-off is the granularity at which transactions’ reads and writes
are tracked. If the database keeps track of each transaction’s activity in great detail, it
can be precise about which transactions need to abort, but the bookkeeping overhead
can become significant. Less detailed tracking is faster, but may lead to more transac‐
tions being aborted than strictly necessary.
In some cases, it’s okay for a transaction to read information that was overwritten by
another transaction: depending on what else happened, it’s sometimes possible to
prove that the result of the execution is nevertheless serializable. PostgreSQL uses this
theory to reduce the number of unnecessary aborts [11, 41].
Compared to two-phase locking, the big advantage of serializable snapshot isolation
is that one transaction doesn’t need to block waiting for locks held by another trans‐
action. Like under snapshot isolation, writers don’t block readers, and vice versa. This
design principle makes query latency much more predictable and less variable. In
particular, read-only queries can run on a consistent snapshot without requiring any
locks, which is very appealing for read-heavy workloads.
Compared to serial execution, serializable snapshot isolation is not limited to the
throughput of a single CPU core: FoundationDB distributes the detection of seriali‐
zation conflicts across multiple machines, allowing it to scale to very high through‐
put. Even though data may be partitioned across multiple machines, transactions can
read and write data in multiple partitions while ensuring serializable isolation [54].
Serializability | 265

The rate of aborts significantly affects the overall performance of SSI. For example, a
transaction that reads and writes data over a long period of time is likely to run into
conflicts and abort, so SSI requires that read-write transactions be fairly short (long-
running read-only transactions may be okay). However, SSI is probably less sensitive
to slow transactions than two-phase locking or serial execution. 
Summary
Transactions are an abstraction layer that allows an application to pretend that cer‐
tain concurrency problems and certain kinds of hardware and software faults don’t
exist. A large class of errors is reduced down to a simple transaction abort, and the
application just needs to try again.
In this chapter we saw many examples of problems that transactions help prevent.
Not all applications are susceptible to all those problems: an application with very
simple access patterns, such as reading and writing only a single record, can probably
manage without transactions. However, for more complex access patterns, transac‐
tions can hugely reduce the number of potential error cases you need to think about.
Without transactions, various error scenarios (processes crashing, network interrup‐
tions, power outages, disk full, unexpected concurrency, etc.) mean that data can
become inconsistent in various ways. For example, denormalized data can easily go
out of sync with the source data. Without transactions, it becomes very difficult to
reason about the effects that complex interacting accesses can have on the database.
In this chapter, we went particularly deep into the topic of concurrency control. We
discussed several widely used isolation levels, in particular read committed, snapshot
isolation (sometimes called repeatable read), and serializable. We characterized those
isolation levels by discussing various examples of race conditions:
Dirty reads
One client reads another client’s writes before they have been committed. The
read committed isolation level and stronger levels prevent dirty reads.
Dirty writes
One client overwrites data that another client has written, but not yet committed.
Almost all transaction implementations prevent dirty writes.
Read skew (nonrepeatable reads)
A client sees different parts of the database at different points in time. This issue
is most commonly prevented with snapshot isolation, which allows a transaction
to read from a consistent snapshot at one point in time. It is usually implemented
with multi-version concurrency control (MVCC).
266 | Chapter 7: Transactions

Lost updates
Two clients concurrently perform a read-modify-write cycle. One overwrites the
other’s write without incorporating its changes, so data is lost. Some implemen‐
tations of snapshot isolation prevent this anomaly automatically, while others
require a manual lock (SELECT FOR UPDATE).
Write skew
A transaction reads something, makes a decision based on the value it saw, and
writes the decision to the database. However, by the time the write is made, the
premise of the decision is no longer true. Only serializable isolation prevents this
anomaly.
Phantom reads
A transaction reads objects that match some search condition. Another client
makes a write that affects the results of that search. Snapshot isolation prevents
straightforward phantom reads, but phantoms in the context of write skew
require special treatment, such as index-range locks.
Weak isolation levels protect against some of those anomalies but leave you, the
application developer, to handle others manually (e.g., using explicit locking). Only
serializable isolation protects against all of these issues. We discussed three different
approaches to implementing serializable transactions:
Literally executing transactions in a serial order
If you can make each transaction very fast to execute, and the transaction
throughput is low enough to process on a single CPU core, this is a simple and
effective option.
Two-phase locking
For decades this has been the standard way of implementing serializability, but
many applications avoid using it because of its performance characteristics.
Serializable snapshot isolation (SSI)
A fairly new algorithm that avoids most of the downsides of the previous
approaches. It uses an optimistic approach, allowing transactions to proceed
without blocking. When a transaction wants to commit, it is checked, and it is
aborted if the execution was not serializable.
The examples in this chapter used a relational data model. However, as discussed in
“The need for multi-object transactions” on page 231, transactions are a valuable
database feature, no matter which data model is used.
In this chapter, we explored ideas and algorithms mostly in the context of a database
running on a single machine. Transactions in distributed databases open a new set of
difficult challenges, which we’ll discuss in the next two chapters. 
Summary | 267

References
[1] Donald D. Chamberlin, Morton M. Astrahan, Michael W. Blasgen, et al.: “ A His‐
tory and Evaluation of System R ,” Communications of the ACM , volume 24, number
10, pages 632–646, October 1981. doi:10.1145/358769.358784
[2] Jim N. Gray, Raymond A. Lorie, Gianfranco R. Putzolu, and Irving L. Traiger:
“ Granularity of Locks and Degrees of Consistency in a Shared Data Base ,” in Model‐
ling in Data Base Management Systems: Proceedings of the IFIP Working Conference
on Modelling in Data Base Management Systems , edited by G. M. Nijssen, pages 364–
394, Elsevier/North Holland Publishing, 1976. Also in Readings in Database Systems ,
4th edition, edited by Joseph M. Hellerstein and Michael Stonebraker, MIT Press,
2005. ISBN: 978-0-262-69314-1
[3] Kapali P. Eswaran, Jim N. Gray, Raymond A. Lorie, and Irving L. Traiger: “ The
Notions of Consistency and Predicate Locks in a Database System ,” Communications
of the ACM, volume 19, number 11, pages 624–633, November 1976.
[4] “ ACID Transactions Are Incredibly Helpful,” FoundationDB, LLC, 2013.
[5] John D. Cook: “ ACID Versus BASE for Database Transactions ,” johndcook.com,
July 6, 2009.
[6] Gavin Clarke: “ NoSQL’s CAP Theorem Busters: We Don’t Drop ACID ,” theregis‐
ter.co.uk, November 22, 2012.
[7] Theo Härder and Andreas Reuter: “ Principles of Transaction-Oriented Database
Recovery,” ACM Computing Surveys , volume 15, number 4, pages 287–317, Decem‐
ber 1983. doi:10.1145/289.291
[8] Peter Bailis, Alan Fekete, Ali Ghodsi, et al.: “ HAT, not CAP: Towards Highly
Available Transactions,” at 14th USENIX Workshop on Hot Topics in Operating Sys‐
tems (HotOS), May 2013.
[9] Armando Fox, Steven D. Gribble, Yatin Chawathe, et al.: “ Cluster-Based Scalable
Network Services,” at 16th ACM Symposium on Operating Systems Principles  (SOSP),
October 1997.
[10] Philip A. Bernstein, Vassos Hadzilacos, and Nathan Goodman: Concurrency
Control and Recovery in Database Systems . Addison-Wesley, 1987. ISBN:
978-0-201-10715-9, available online at research.microsoft.com.
[11] Alan Fekete, Dimitrios Liarokapis, Elizabeth O’Neil, et al.: “ Making Snapshot
Isolation Serializable,” ACM Transactions on Database Systems , volume 30, number
2, pages 492–528, June 2005. doi:10.1145/1071610.1071615
268 | Chapter 7: Transactions

[12] Mai Zheng, Joseph Tucek, Feng Qin, and Mark Lillibridge: “ Understanding the
Robustness of SSDs Under Power Fault ,” at 11th USENIX Conference on File and
Storage Technologies (FAST), February 2013.
[13] Laurie Denness: “ SSDs: A Gift and a Curse,” laur.ie, June 2, 2015.
[14] Adam Surak: “ When Solid State Drives Are Not That Solid ,” blog.algolia.com,
June 15, 2015.
[15] Thanumalayan Sankaranarayana Pillai, Vijay Chidambaram, Ramnatthan Ala‐
gappan, et al.: “ All File Systems Are Not Created Equal: On the Complexity of Craft‐
ing Crash-Consistent Applications ,” at 11th USENIX Symposium on Operating
Systems Design and Implementation (OSDI), October 2014.
[16] Chris Siebenmann: “ Unix’s File Durability Problem ,” utcc.utoronto.ca, April 14,
2016.
[17] Lakshmi N. Bairavasundaram, Garth R. Goodson, Bianca Schroeder, et al.: “ An
Analysis of Data Corruption in the Storage Stack ,” at 6th USENIX Conference on File
and Storage Technologies (FAST), February 2008.
[18] Bianca Schroeder, Raghav Lagisetty, and Arif Merchant: “ Flash Reliability in
Production: The Expected and the Unexpected ,” at 14th USENIX Conference on File
and Storage Technologies (FAST), February 2016.
[19] Don Allison: “ SSD Storage – Ignorance of Technology Is No Excuse ,” blog.kore‐
logic.com, March 24, 2015.
[20] Dave Scherer: “ Those Are Not Transactions (Cassandra 2.0) ,” blog.founda‐
tiondb.com, September 6, 2013.
[21] Kyle Kingsbury: “ Call Me Maybe: Cassandra,” aphyr.com, September 24, 2013.
[22] “ ACID Support in Aerospike,” Aerospike, Inc., June 2014.
[23] Martin Kleppmann: “ Hermitage: Testing the ‘I’ in ACID ,” martin.klepp‐
mann.com, November 25, 2014.
[24] Tristan D’Agosta: “ BTC Stolen from Poloniex,” bitcointalk.org, March 4, 2014.
[25] bitcointhief2: “ How I Stole Roughly 100 BTC from an Exchange and How I
Could Have Stolen More!,” reddit.com, February 2, 2014.
[26] Sudhir Jorwekar, Alan Fekete, Krithi Ramamritham, and S. Sudarshan: “ Auto‐
mating the Detection of Snapshot Isolation Anomalies,” at 33rd International Confer‐
ence on Very Large Data Bases (VLDB), September 2007.
[27] Michael Melanson: “ Transactions: The Limits of Isolation ,” michaelmelan‐
son.net, March 20, 2014.
Summary | 269

[28] Hal Berenson, Philip A. Bernstein, Jim N. Gray, et al.: “ A Critique of ANSI SQL
Isolation Levels ,” at ACM International Conference on Management of Data  (SIG‐
MOD), May 1995.
[29] Atul Adya: “ Weak Consistency: A Generalized Theory and Optimistic Imple‐
mentations for Distributed Transactions ,” PhD Thesis, Massachusetts Institute of
Technology, March 1999.
[30] Peter Bailis, Aaron Davidson, Alan Fekete, et al.: “ Highly Available Transactions:
Virtues and Limitations (Extended Version) ,” at 40th International Conference on
Very Large Data Bases (VLDB), September 2014.
[31] Bruce Momjian: “ MVCC Unmasked,” momjian.us, July 2014.
[32] Annamalai Gurusami: “ Repeatable Read Isolation Level in InnoDB – How Con‐
sistent Read View Works,” blogs.oracle.com, January 15, 2013.
[33] Nikita Prokopov: “ Unofficial Guide to Datomic Internals ,” tonsky.me, May 6,
2014.
[34] Baron Schwartz: “ Immutability, MVCC, and Garbage Collection ,” xaprb.com,
December 28, 2013.
[35] J. Chris Anderson, Jan Lehnardt, and Noah Slater: CouchDB: The Definitive
Guide. O’Reilly Media, 2010. ISBN: 978-0-596-15589-6
[36] Rikdeb Mukherjee: “ Isolation in DB2 (Repeatable Read, Read Stability, Cursor
Stability, Uncommitted Read) with Examples,” mframes.blogspot.co.uk, July 4, 2013.
[37] Steve Hilker: “ Cursor Stability (CS) – IBM DB2 Community ,” toadworld.com,
March 14, 2013.
[38] Nate Wiger: “ An Atomic Rant,” nateware.com, February 18, 2010.
[39] Joel Jacobson: “ Riak 2.0: Data Types,” blog.joeljacobson.com, March 23, 2014.
[40] Michael J. Cahill, Uwe Röhm, and Alan Fekete: “ Serializable Isolation for Snap‐
shot Databases ,” at ACM International Conference on Management of Data  (SIG‐
MOD), June 2008. doi:10.1145/1376616.1376690
[41] Dan R. K. Ports and Kevin Grittner: “ Serializable Snapshot Isolation in Post‐
greSQL,” at 38th International Conference on Very Large Databases  (VLDB), August
2012.
[42] Tony Andrews: “ Enforcing Complex Constraints in Oracle ,” tonyandrews.blog‐
spot.co.uk, October 15, 2004.
[43] Douglas B. Terry, Marvin M. Theimer, Karin Petersen, et al.: “ Managing Update
Conflicts in Bayou, a Weakly Connected Replicated Storage System ,” at 15th ACM
270 | Chapter 7: Transactions

Symposium on Operating Systems Principles  (SOSP), December 1995. doi:
10.1145/224056.224070
[44] Gary Fredericks: “ Postgres Serializability Bug,” github.com, September 2015.
[45] Michael Stonebraker, Samuel Madden, Daniel J. Abadi, et al.: “ The End of an
Architectural Era (It’s Time for a Complete Rewrite) ,” at 33rd International Confer‐
ence on Very Large Data Bases (VLDB), September 2007.
[46] John Hugg: “ H-Store/VoltDB Architecture vs. CEP Systems and Newer Stream‐
ing Architectures,” at Data @Scale Boston, November 2014.
[47] Robert Kallman, Hideaki Kimura, Jonathan Natkins, et al.: “ H-Store: A High-
Performance, Distributed Main Memory Transaction Processing System ,” Proceed‐
ings of the VLDB Endowment, volume 1, number 2, pages 1496–1499, August 2008.
[48] Rich Hickey: “ The Architecture of Datomic,” infoq.com, November 2, 2012.
[49] John Hugg: “ Debunking Myths About the VoltDB In-Memory Database ,”
voltdb.com, May 12, 2014.
[50] Joseph M. Hellerstein, Michael Stonebraker, and James Hamilton: “ Architecture
of a Database System ,” Foundations and Trends in Databases , volume 1, number 2,
pages 141–259, November 2007. doi:10.1561/1900000002
[51] Michael J. Cahill: “ Serializable Isolation for Snapshot Databases ,” PhD Thesis,
University of Sydney, July 2009.
[52] D. Z. Badal: “ Correctness of Concurrency Control and Implications in Dis‐
tributed Databases ,” at 3rd International IEEE Computer Software and Applications
Conference (COMPSAC), November 1979.
[53] Rakesh Agrawal, Michael J. Carey, and Miron Livny: “ Concurrency Control Per‐
formance Modeling: Alternatives and Implications ,” ACM Transactions on Database
Systems (TODS), volume 12, number 4, pages 609–654, December 1987. doi:
10.1145/32204.32220
[54] Dave Rosenthal: “ Databases at 14.4MHz,” blog.foundationdb.com, December 10,
2014.
Summary | 271

i. With one exception: we will assume that faults are non-Byzantine (see “Byzantine Faults” on page 304 ).
CHAPTER 8
The Trouble with Distributed Systems
Hey I just met you
The network’s laggy
But here’s my data
So store it maybe
—Kyle Kingsbury, Carly Rae Jepsen and the Perils of Network Partitions (2013)
A recurring theme in the last few chapters has been how systems handle things going
wrong. For example, we discussed replica failover ( “Handling Node Outages” on
page 156), replication lag ( “Problems with Replication Lag” on page 161), and con‐
currency control for transactions (“Weak Isolation Levels”  on page 233). As we come
to understand various edge cases that can occur in real systems, we get better at han‐
dling them.
However, even though we have talked a lot about faults, the last few chapters have
still been too optimistic. The reality is even darker. We will now turn our pessimism
to the maximum and assume that anything that can go wrong will go wrong.i (Expe‐
rienced systems operators will tell you that is a reasonable assumption. If you ask
nicely, they might tell you some frightening stories while nursing their scars of past
battles.)
Working with distributed systems is fundamentally different from writing software
on a single computer—and the main difference is that there are lots of new and excit‐
ing ways for things to go wrong [ 1, 2]. In this chapter, we will get a taste of the prob‐
lems that arise in practice, and an understanding of the things we can and cannot rely
on.
273

In the end, our task as engineers is to build systems that do their job (i.e., meet the
guarantees that users are expecting), in spite of everything going wrong. In Chapter 9,
we will look at some examples of algorithms that can provide such guarantees in a
distributed system. But first, in this chapter, we must understand what challenges we
are up against.
This chapter is a thoroughly pessimistic and depressing overview of things that may
go wrong in a distributed system. We will look into problems with networks ( “Unre‐
liable Networks” on page 277); clocks and timing issues (“Unreliable Clocks” on page
287); and we’ll discuss to what degree they are avoidable. The consequences of all
these issues are disorienting, so we’ll explore how to think about the state of a dis‐
tributed system and how to reason about things that have happened ( “Knowledge,
Truth, and Lies” on page 300 ).
Faults and Partial Failures
When you are writing a program on a single computer, it normally behaves in a fairly
predictable way: either it works or it doesn’t. Buggy software may give the appearance
that the computer is sometimes “having a bad day” (a problem that is often fixed by a
reboot), but that is mostly just a consequence of badly written software.
There is no fundamental reason why software on a single computer should be flaky:
when the hardware is working correctly, the same operation always produces the
same result (it is deterministic). If there is a hardware problem (e.g., memory corrup‐
tion or a loose connector), the consequence is usually a total system failure (e.g., ker‐
nel panic, “blue screen of death,” failure to start up). An individual computer with
good software is usually either fully functional or entirely broken, but not something
in between.
This is a deliberate choice in the design of computers: if an internal fault occurs, we
prefer a computer to crash completely rather than returning a wrong result, because
wrong results are difficult and confusing to deal with. Thus, computers hide the fuzzy
physical reality on which they are implemented and present an idealized system
model that operates with mathematical perfection. A CPU instruction always does
the same thing; if you write some data to memory or disk, that data remains intact
and doesn’t get randomly corrupted. This design goal of always-correct computation
goes all the way back to the very first digital computer [3].
When you are writing software that runs on several computers, connected by a net‐
work, the situation is fundamentally different. In distributed systems, we are no
longer operating in an idealized system model—we have no choice but to confront
the messy reality of the physical world. And in the physical world, a remarkably wide
range of things can go wrong, as illustrated by this anecdote [4]:
274 | Chapter 8: The Trouble with Distributed Systems

In my limited experience I’ve dealt with long-lived network partitions in a single data
center (DC), PDU [power distribution unit] failures, switch failures, accidental power
cycles of whole racks, whole-DC backbone failures, whole-DC power failures, and a
hypoglycemic driver smashing his Ford pickup truck into a DC’s HVAC [heating, ven‐
tilation, and air conditioning] system. And I’m not even an ops guy.
—Coda Hale
In a distributed system, there may well be some parts of the system that are broken in
some unpredictable way, even though other parts of the system are working fine. This
is known as a partial failure. The difficulty is that partial failures are nondeterministic:
if you try to do anything involving multiple nodes and the network, it may sometimes
work and sometimes unpredictably fail. As we shall see, you may not even know
whether something succeeded or not, as the time it takes for a message to travel
across a network is also nondeterministic!
This nondeterminism and possibility of partial failures is what makes distributed sys‐
tems hard to work with [5].
Cloud Computing and Supercomputing
There is a spectrum of philosophies on how to build large-scale computing systems:
• At one end of the scale is the field of high-performance computing (HPC). Super‐
computers with thousands of CPUs are typically used for computationally inten‐
sive scientific computing tasks, such as weather forecasting or molecular
dynamics (simulating the movement of atoms and molecules).
• At the other extreme is cloud computing, which is not very well defined [ 6] but is
often associated with multi-tenant datacenters, commodity computers connected
with an IP network (often Ethernet), elastic/on-demand resource allocation, and
metered billing.
• Traditional enterprise datacenters lie somewhere between these extremes.
With these philosophies come very different approaches to handling faults. In a
supercomputer, a job typically checkpoints the state of its computation to durable
storage from time to time. If one node fails, a common solution is to simply stop the
entire cluster workload. After the faulty node is repaired, the computation is restarted
from the last checkpoint [ 7, 8]. Thus, a supercomputer is more like a single-node
computer than a distributed system: it deals with partial failure by letting it escalate
into total failure—if any part of the system fails, just let everything crash (like a kernel
panic on a single machine).
In this book we focus on systems for implementing internet services, which usually
look very different from supercomputers:
Faults and Partial Failures | 275

• Many internet-related applications are online, in the sense that they need to be
able to serve users with low latency at any time. Making the service unavailable—
for example, stopping the cluster for repair—is not acceptable. In contrast, off‐
line (batch) jobs like weather simulations can be stopped and restarted with fairly
low impact.
• Supercomputers are typically built from specialized hardware, where each node
is quite reliable, and nodes communicate through shared memory and remote
direct memory access (RDMA). On the other hand, nodes in cloud services are
built from commodity machines, which can provide equivalent performance at
lower cost due to economies of scale, but also have higher failure rates.
• Large datacenter networks are often based on IP and Ethernet, arranged in Clos
topologies to provide high bisection bandwidth [ 9]. Supercomputers often use
specialized network topologies, such as multi-dimensional meshes and toruses
[10], which yield better performance for HPC workloads with known communi‐
cation patterns.
• The bigger a system gets, the more likely it is that one of its components is bro‐
ken. Over time, broken things get fixed and new things break, but in a system
with thousands of nodes, it is reasonable to assume that something is always bro‐
ken [7]. When the error handling strategy consists of simply giving up, a large
system can end up spending a lot of its time recovering from faults rather than
doing useful work [8].
• If the system can tolerate failed nodes and still keep working as a whole, that is a
very useful feature for operations and maintenance: for example, you can per‐
form a rolling upgrade (see Chapter 4), restarting one node at a time, while the
service continues serving users without interruption. In cloud environments, if
one virtual machine is not performing well, you can just kill it and request a new
one (hoping that the new one will be faster).
• In a geographically distributed deployment (keeping data geographically close to
your users to reduce access latency), communication most likely goes over the
internet, which is slow and unreliable compared to local networks. Supercom‐
puters generally assume that all of their nodes are close together.
If we want to make distributed systems work, we must accept the possibility of partial
failure and build fault-tolerance mechanisms into the software. In other words, we
need to build a reliable system from unreliable components. (As discussed in “Relia‐
bility”  on page 6, there is no such thing as perfect reliability, so we’ll need to under‐
stand the limits of what we can realistically promise.)
Even in smaller systems consisting of only a few nodes, it’s important to think about
partial failure. In a small system, it’s quite likely that most of the components are
working correctly most of the time. However, sooner or later, some part of the system
276 | Chapter 8: The Trouble with Distributed Systems

will become faulty, and the software will have to somehow handle it. The fault han‐
dling must be part of the software design, and you (as operator of the software) need
to know what behavior to expect from the software in the case of a fault.
It would be unwise to assume that faults are rare and simply hope for the best. It is
important to consider a wide range of possible faults—even fairly unlikely ones—and
to artificially create such situations in your testing environment to see what happens.
In distributed systems, suspicion, pessimism, and paranoia pay off.
Building a Reliable System from Unreliable Components
You may wonder whether this makes any sense—intuitively it may seem like a system
can only be as reliable as its least reliable component (its weakest link). This is not the
case: in fact, it is an old idea in computing to construct a more reliable system from a
less reliable underlying base [11]. For example:
• Error-correcting codes allow digital data to be transmitted accurately across a
communication channel that occasionally gets some bits wrong, for example due
to radio interference on a wireless network [12].
• IP (the Internet Protocol) is unreliable: it may drop, delay, duplicate, or reorder
packets. TCP (the Transmission Control Protocol) provides a more reliable
transport layer on top of IP: it ensures that missing packets are retransmitted,
duplicates are eliminated, and packets are reassembled into the order in which
they were sent.
Although the system can be more reliable than its underlying parts, there is always a
limit to how much more reliable it can be. For example, error-correcting codes can
deal with a small number of single-bit errors, but if your signal is swamped by inter‐
ference, there is a fundamental limit to how much data you can get through your
communication channel [ 13]. TCP can hide packet loss, duplication, and reordering
from you, but it cannot magically remove delays in the network.
Although the more reliable higher-level system is not perfect, it’s still useful because it
takes care of some of the tricky low-level faults, and so the remaining faults are usu‐
ally easier to reason about and deal with. We will explore this matter further in “The
end-to-end argument” on page 519 . 
Unreliable Networks
As discussed in the introduction to Part II, the distributed systems we focus on in this
book are shared-nothing systems: i.e., a bunch of machines connected by a network.
The network is the only way those machines can communicate—we assume that each
Unreliable Networks | 277

machine has its own memory and disk, and one machine cannot access another
machine’s memory or disk (except by making requests to a service over the network).
Shared-nothing is not the only way of building systems, but it has become the domi‐
nant approach for building internet services, for several reasons: it’s comparatively
cheap because it requires no special hardware, it can make use of commoditized
cloud computing services, and it can achieve high reliability through redundancy
across multiple geographically distributed datacenters.
The internet and most internal networks in datacenters (often Ethernet) are asyn‐
chronous packet networks . In this kind of network, one node can send a message (a
packet) to another node, but the network gives no guarantees as to when it will arrive,
or whether it will arrive at all. If you send a request and expect a response, many
things could go wrong (some of which are illustrated in Figure 8-1):
1. Your request may have been lost (perhaps someone unplugged a network cable).
2. Your request may be waiting in a queue and will be delivered later (perhaps the
network or the recipient is overloaded).
3. The remote node may have failed (perhaps it crashed or it was powered down).
4. The remote node may have temporarily stopped responding (perhaps it is expe‐
riencing a long garbage collection pause; see “Process Pauses” on page 295 ), but it
will start responding again later.
5. The remote node may have processed your request, but the response has been
lost on the network (perhaps a network switch has been misconfigured).
6. The remote node may have processed your request, but the response has been
delayed and will be delivered later (perhaps the network or your own machine is
overloaded).
Figure 8-1. If you send a request and don’t get a response, it’s not possible to distinguish
whether (a) the request was lost, (b) the remote node is down, or (c) the response was
lost.
278 | Chapter 8: The Trouble with Distributed Systems

The sender can’t even tell whether the packet was delivered: the only option is for the
recipient to send a response message, which may in turn be lost or delayed. These
issues are indistinguishable in an asynchronous network: the only information you
have is that you haven’t received a response yet. If you send a request to another node
and don’t receive a response, it is impossible to tell why.
The usual way of handling this issue is a timeout: after some time you give up waiting
and assume that the response is not going to arrive. However, when a timeout occurs,
you still don’t know whether the remote node got your request or not (and if the
request is still queued somewhere, it may still be delivered to the recipient, even if the
sender has given up on it).
Network Faults in Practice
We have been building computer networks for decades—one might hope that by now
we would have figured out how to make them reliable. However, it seems that we
have not yet succeeded.
There are some systematic studies, and plenty of anecdotal evidence, showing that
network problems can be surprisingly common, even in controlled environments like
a datacenter operated by one company [14]. One study in a medium-sized datacenter
found about 12 network faults per month, of which half disconnected a single
machine, and half disconnected an entire rack [ 15]. Another study measured the fail‐
ure rates of components like top-of-rack switches, aggregation switches, and load bal‐
ancers [16]. It found that adding redundant networking gear doesn’t reduce faults as
much as you might hope, since it doesn’t guard against human error (e.g., misconfig‐
ured switches), which is a major cause of outages.
Public cloud services such as EC2 are notorious for having frequent transient net‐
work glitches [ 14], and well-managed private datacenter networks can be stabler
environments. Nevertheless, nobody is immune from network problems: for exam‐
ple, a problem during a software upgrade for a switch could trigger a network topol‐
ogy reconfiguration, during which network packets could be delayed for more than a
minute [17]. Sharks might bite undersea cables and damage them [18]. Other surpris‐
ing faults include a network interface that sometimes drops all inbound packets but
sends outbound packets successfully [ 19]: just because a network link works in one
direction doesn’t guarantee it’s also working in the opposite direction.
Network partitions
When one part of the network is cut off from the rest due to a net‐
work fault, that is sometimes called a network partition or netsplit.
In this book we’ll generally stick with the more general term net‐
work fault, to avoid confusion with partitions (shards) of a storage
system, as discussed in Chapter 6.
Unreliable Networks | 279

Even if network faults are rare in your environment, the fact that faults can occur
means that your software needs to be able to handle them. Whenever any communi‐
cation happens over a network, it may fail—there is no way around it.
If the error handling of network faults is not defined and tested, arbitrarily bad things
could happen: for example, the cluster could become deadlocked and permanently
unable to serve requests, even when the network recovers [ 20], or it could even delete
all of your data [ 21]. If software is put in an unanticipated situation, it may do arbi‐
trary unexpected things.
Handling network faults doesn’t necessarily mean tolerating them: if your network is
normally fairly reliable, a valid approach may be to simply show an error message to
users while your network is experiencing problems. However, you do need to know
how your software reacts to network problems and ensure that the system can
recover from them. It may make sense to deliberately trigger network problems and
test the system’s response (this is the idea behind Chaos Monkey; see “Reliability” on
page 6).
Detecting Faults
Many systems need to automatically detect faulty nodes. For example:
• A load balancer needs to stop sending requests to a node that is dead (i.e., take it
out of rotation).
• In a distributed database with single-leader replication, if the leader fails, one of
the followers needs to be promoted to be the new leader (see “Handling Node
Outages” on page 156 ).
Unfortunately, the uncertainty about the network makes it difficult to tell whether a
node is working or not. In some specific circumstances you might get some feedback
to explicitly tell you that something is not working:
• If you can reach the machine on which the node should be running, but no pro‐
cess is listening on the destination port (e.g., because the process crashed), the
operating system will helpfully close or refuse TCP connections by sending a RST
or FIN packet in reply. However, if the node crashed while it was handling your
request, you have no way of knowing how much data was actually processed by
the remote node [22].
• If a node process crashed (or was killed by an administrator) but the node’s oper‐
ating system is still running, a script can notify other nodes about the crash so
that another node can take over quickly without having to wait for a timeout to
expire. For example, HBase does this [23].
280 | Chapter 8: The Trouble with Distributed Systems

• If you have access to the management interface of the network switches in your
datacenter, you can query them to detect link failures at a hardware level (e.g., if
the remote machine is powered down). This option is ruled out if you’re con‐
necting via the internet, or if you’re in a shared datacenter with no access to the
switches themselves, or if you can’t reach the management interface due to a net‐
work problem.
• If a router is sure that the IP address you’re trying to connect to is unreachable, it
may reply to you with an ICMP Destination Unreachable packet. However, the
router doesn’t have a magic failure detection capability either—it is subject to the
same limitations as other participants of the network.
Rapid feedback about a remote node being down is useful, but you can’t count on it.
Even if TCP acknowledges that a packet was delivered, the application may have
crashed before handling it. If you want to be sure that a request was successful, you
need a positive response from the application itself [24].
Conversely, if something has gone wrong, you may get an error response at some
level of the stack, but in general you have to assume that you will get no response at
all. You can retry a few times (TCP retries transparently, but you may also retry at the
application level), wait for a timeout to elapse, and eventually declare the node dead if
you don’t hear back within the timeout. 
Timeouts and Unbounded Delays
If a timeout is the only sure way of detecting a fault, then how long should the time‐
out be? There is unfortunately no simple answer.
A long timeout means a long wait until a node is declared dead (and during this time,
users may have to wait or see error messages). A short timeout detects faults faster,
but carries a higher risk of incorrectly declaring a node dead when in fact it has only
suffered a temporary slowdown (e.g., due to a load spike on the node or the network).
Prematurely declaring a node dead is problematic: if the node is actually alive and in
the middle of performing some action (for example, sending an email), and another
node takes over, the action may end up being performed twice. We will discuss this
issue in more detail in “Knowledge, Truth, and Lies” on page 300, and in Chapters 9
and 11.
When a node is declared dead, its responsibilities need to be transferred to other
nodes, which places additional load on other nodes and the network. If the system is
already struggling with high load, declaring nodes dead prematurely can make the
problem worse. In particular, it could happen that the node actually wasn’t dead but
only slow to respond due to overload; transferring its load to other nodes can cause a
cascading failure (in the extreme case, all nodes declare each other dead, and every‐
thing stops working).
Unreliable Networks | 281

Imagine a fictitious system with a network that guaranteed a maximum delay for
packets—every packet is either delivered within some time d, or it is lost, but delivery
never takes longer than d. Furthermore, assume that you can guarantee that a non-
failed node always handles a request within some time r. In this case, you could guar‐
antee that every successful request receives a response within time 2 d + r—and if you
don’t receive a response within that time, you know that either the network or the
remote node is not working. If this was true, 2 d + r would be a reasonable timeout to
use.
Unfortunately, most systems we work with have neither of those guarantees: asyn‐
chronous networks have unbounded delays  (that is, they try to deliver packets as
quickly as possible, but there is no upper limit on the time it may take for a packet to
arrive), and most server implementations cannot guarantee that they can handle
requests within some maximum time (see “Response time guarantees”  on page 298).
For failure detection, it’s not sufficient for the system to be fast most of the time: if
your timeout is low, it only takes a transient spike in round-trip times to throw the
system off-balance.
Network congestion and queueing
When driving a car, travel times on road networks often vary most due to traffic con‐
gestion. Similarly, the variability of packet delays on computer networks is most often
due to queueing [25]:
• If several different nodes simultaneously try to send packets to the same destina‐
tion, the network switch must queue them up and feed them into the destination
network link one by one (as illustrated in Figure 8-2). On a busy network link, a
packet may have to wait a while until it can get a slot (this is called network con‐
gestion). If there is so much incoming data that the switch queue fills up, the
packet is dropped, so it needs to be resent—even though the network is function‐
ing fine.
• When a packet reaches the destination machine, if all CPU cores are currently
busy, the incoming request from the network is queued by the operating system
until the application is ready to handle it. Depending on the load on the machine,
this may take an arbitrary length of time.
• In virtualized environments, a running operating system is often paused for tens
of milliseconds while another virtual machine uses a CPU core. During this time,
the VM cannot consume any data from the network, so the incoming data is
queued (buffered) by the virtual machine monitor [ 26], further increasing the
variability of network delays.
• TCP performs flow control (also known as congestion avoidance or backpressure),
in which a node limits its own rate of sending in order to avoid overloading a
282 | Chapter 8: The Trouble with Distributed Systems

network link or the receiving node [ 27]. This means additional queueing at the
sender before the data even enters the network.
Figure 8-2. If several machines send network traffic to the same destination, its switch
queue can fill up. Here, ports 1, 2, and 4 are all trying to send packets to port 3.
Moreover, TCP considers a packet to be lost if it is not acknowledged within some
timeout (which is calculated from observed round-trip times), and lost packets are
automatically retransmitted. Although the application does not see the packet loss
and retransmission, it does see the resulting delay (waiting for the timeout to expire,
and then waiting for the retransmitted packet to be acknowledged).
TCP Versus UDP
Some latency-sensitive applications, such as videoconferencing and Voice over IP
(VoIP), use UDP rather than TCP. It’s a trade-off between reliability and variability
of delays: as UDP does not perform flow control and does not retransmit lost packets,
it avoids some of the reasons for variable network delays (although it is still suscepti‐
ble to switch queues and scheduling delays).
UDP is a good choice in situations where delayed data is worthless. For example, in a
VoIP phone call, there probably isn’t enough time to retransmit a lost packet before
its data is due to be played over the loudspeakers. In this case, there’s no point in
retransmitting the packet—the application must instead fill the missing packet’s time
slot with silence (causing a brief interruption in the sound) and move on in the
stream. The retry happens at the human layer instead. (“Could you repeat that please?
The sound just cut out for a moment.”)
All of these factors contribute to the variability of network delays. Queueing delays
have an especially wide range when a system is close to its maximum capacity: a sys‐
Unreliable Networks | 283

tem with plenty of spare capacity can easily drain queues, whereas in a highly utilized
system, long queues can build up very quickly.
In public clouds and multi-tenant datacenters, resources are shared among many
customers: the network links and switches, and even each machine’s network inter‐
face and CPUs (when running on virtual machines), are shared. Batch workloads
such as MapReduce (see Chapter 10) can easily saturate network links. As you have
no control over or insight into other customers’ usage of the shared resources, net‐
work delays can be highly variable if someone near you (a noisy neighbor) is using a
lot of resources [28, 29].
In such environments, you can only choose timeouts experimentally: measure the
distribution of network round-trip times over an extended period, and over many
machines, to determine the expected variability of delays. Then, taking into account
your application’s characteristics, you can determine an appropriate trade-off
between failure detection delay and risk of premature timeouts.
Even better, rather than using configured constant timeouts, systems can continually
measure response times and their variability ( jitter), and automatically adjust time‐
outs according to the observed response time distribution. This can be done with a
Phi Accrual failure detector [ 30], which is used for example in Akka and Cassandra
[31]. TCP retransmission timeouts also work similarly [27].
Synchronous Versus Asynchronous Networks
Distributed systems would be a lot simpler if we could rely on the network to deliver
packets with some fixed maximum delay, and not to drop packets. Why can’t we
solve this at the hardware level and make the network reliable so that the software
doesn’t need to worry about it?
To answer this question, it’s interesting to compare datacenter networks to the tradi‐
tional fixed-line telephone network (non-cellular, non-VoIP), which is extremely
reliable: delayed audio frames and dropped calls are very rare. A phone call requires a
constantly low end-to-end latency and enough bandwidth to transfer the audio sam‐
ples of your voice. Wouldn’t it be nice to have similar reliability and predictability in
computer networks?
When you make a call over the telephone network, it establishes a circuit: a fixed,
guaranteed amount of bandwidth is allocated for the call, along the entire route
between the two callers. This circuit remains in place until the call ends [ 32]. For
example, an ISDN network runs at a fixed rate of 4,000 frames per second. When a
call is established, it is allocated 16 bits of space within each frame (in each direction).
Thus, for the duration of the call, each side is guaranteed to be able to send exactly 16
bits of audio data every 250 microseconds [33, 34].
284 | Chapter 8: The Trouble with Distributed Systems

ii. Except perhaps for an occasional keepalive packet, if TCP keepalive is enabled.
iii. Asynchronous Transfer Mode (ATM) was a competitor to Ethernet in the 1980s [32], but it didn’t gain
much adoption outside of telephone network core switches. It has nothing to do with automatic teller
machines (also known as cash machines), despite sharing an acronym. Perhaps, in some parallel universe, the
internet is based on something like ATM—in that universe, internet video calls are probably a lot more relia‐
ble than they are in ours, because they don’t suffer from dropped and delayed packets.
This kind of network is synchronous: even as data passes through several routers, it
does not suffer from queueing, because the 16 bits of space for the call have already
been reserved in the next hop of the network. And because there is no queueing, the
maximum end-to-end latency of the network is fixed. We call this a bounded delay.
Can we not simply make network delays predictable?
Note that a circuit in a telephone network is very different from a TCP connection: a
circuit is a fixed amount of reserved bandwidth which nobody else can use while the
circuit is established, whereas the packets of a TCP connection opportunistically use
whatever network bandwidth is available. You can give TCP a variable-sized block of
data (e.g., an email or a web page), and it will try to transfer it in the shortest time
possible. While a TCP connection is idle, it doesn’t use any bandwidth. ii
If datacenter networks and the internet were circuit-switched networks, it would be
possible to establish a guaranteed maximum round-trip time when a circuit was set
up. However, they are not: Ethernet and IP are packet-switched protocols, which suf‐
fer from queueing and thus unbounded delays in the network. These protocols do
not have the concept of a circuit.
Why do datacenter networks and the internet use packet switching? The answer is
that they are optimized for bursty traffic. A circuit is good for an audio or video call,
which needs to transfer a fairly constant number of bits per second for the duration
of the call. On the other hand, requesting a web page, sending an email, or transfer‐
ring a file doesn’t have any particular bandwidth requirement—we just want it to
complete as quickly as possible.
If you wanted to transfer a file over a circuit, you would have to guess a bandwidth
allocation. If you guess too low, the transfer is unnecessarily slow, leaving network
capacity unused. If you guess too high, the circuit cannot be set up (because the net‐
work cannot allow a circuit to be created if its bandwidth allocation cannot be guar‐
anteed). Thus, using circuits for bursty data transfers wastes network capacity and
makes transfers unnecessarily slow. By contrast, TCP dynamically adapts the rate of
data transfer to the available network capacity.
There have been some attempts to build hybrid networks that support both circuit
switching and packet switching, such as ATM.iii InfiniBand has some similarities [35]:
it implements end-to-end flow control at the link layer, which reduces the need for
Unreliable Networks | 285

queueing in the network, although it can still suffer from delays due to link conges‐
tion [36]. With careful use of quality of service (QoS, prioritization and scheduling of
packets) and admission control (rate-limiting senders), it is possible to emulate circuit
switching on packet networks, or provide statistically bounded delay [25, 32].
Latency and Resource Utilization
More generally, you can think of variable delays as a consequence of dynamic
resource partitioning.
Say you have a wire between two telephone switches that can carry up to 10,000
simultaneous calls. Each circuit that is switched over this wire occupies one of those
call slots. Thus, you can think of the wire as a resource that can be shared by up to
10,000 simultaneous users. The resource is divided up in a static way: even if you’re
the only call on the wire right now, and all other 9,999 slots are unused, your circuit is
still allocated the same fixed amount of bandwidth as when the wire is fully utilized.
By contrast, the internet shares network bandwidth dynamically. Senders push and
jostle with each other to get their packets over the wire as quickly as possible, and the
network switches decide which packet to send (i.e., the bandwidth allocation) from
one moment to the next. This approach has the downside of queueing, but the advan‐
tage is that it maximizes utilization of the wire. The wire has a fixed cost, so if you
utilize it better, each byte you send over the wire is cheaper.
A similar situation arises with CPUs: if you share each CPU core dynamically
between several threads, one thread sometimes has to wait in the operating system’s
run queue while another thread is running, so a thread can be paused for varying
lengths of time. However, this utilizes the hardware better than if you allocated a
static number of CPU cycles to each thread (see “Response time guarantees” on page
298). Better hardware utilization is also a significant motivation for using virtual
machines.
Latency guarantees are achievable in certain environments, if resources are statically
partitioned (e.g., dedicated hardware and exclusive bandwidth allocations). However,
it comes at the cost of reduced utilization—in other words, it is more expensive. On
the other hand, multi-tenancy with dynamic resource partitioning provides better
utilization, so it is cheaper, but it has the downside of variable delays.
Variable delays in networks are not a law of nature, but simply the result of a cost/
benefit trade-off. 
286 | Chapter 8: The Trouble with Distributed Systems

iv. Peering agreements between internet service providers and the establishment of routes through the Bor‐
der Gateway Protocol (BGP), bear closer resemblance to circuit switching than IP itself. At this level, it is pos‐
sible to buy dedicated bandwidth. However, internet routing operates at the level of networks, not individual
connections between hosts, and at a much longer timescale.
However, such quality of service is currently not enabled in multi-tenant datacenters
and public clouds, or when communicating via the internet. iv Currently deployed
technology does not allow us to make any guarantees about delays or reliability of the
network: we have to assume that network congestion, queueing, and unbounded
delays will happen. Consequently, there’s no “correct” value for timeouts—they need
to be determined experimentally.
Unreliable Clocks
Clocks and time are important. Applications depend on clocks in various ways to
answer questions like the following:
1. Has this request timed out yet?
2. What’s the 99th percentile response time of this service?
3. How many queries per second did this service handle on average in the last five
minutes?
4. How long did the user spend on our site?
5. When was this article published?
6. At what date and time should the reminder email be sent?
7. When does this cache entry expire?
8. What is the timestamp on this error message in the log file?
Examples 1–4 measure durations (e.g., the time interval between a request being sent
and a response being received), whereas examples 5–8 describe points in time (events
that occur on a particular date, at a particular time).
In a distributed system, time is a tricky business, because communication is not
instantaneous: it takes time for a message to travel across the network from one
machine to another. The time when a message is received is always later than the
time when it is sent, but due to variable delays in the network, we don’t know how
much later. This fact sometimes makes it difficult to determine the order in which
things happened when multiple machines are involved.
Moreover, each machine on the network has its own clock, which is an actual hard‐
ware device: usually a quartz crystal oscillator. These devices are not perfectly accu‐
rate, so each machine has its own notion of time, which may be slightly faster or
Unreliable Clocks | 287

v. Although the clock is called real-time, it has nothing to do with real-time operating systems, as discussed
in “Response time guarantees” on page 298 .
slower than on other machines. It is possible to synchronize clocks to some degree:
the most commonly used mechanism is the Network Time Protocol (NTP), which
allows the computer clock to be adjusted according to the time reported by a group of
servers [ 37]. The servers in turn get their time from a more accurate time source,
such as a GPS receiver.
Monotonic Versus Time-of-Day Clocks
Modern computers have at least two different kinds of clocks: a time-of-day clock and
a monotonic clock. Although they both measure time, it is important to distinguish
the two, since they serve different purposes.
Time-of-day clocks
A time-of-day clock does what you intuitively expect of a clock: it returns the current
date and time according to some calendar (also known as wall-clock time). For exam‐
ple, clock_gettime(CLOCK_REALTIME) on Linux v and System.currentTimeMillis()
in Java return the number of seconds (or milliseconds) since the epoch: midnight
UTC on January 1, 1970, according to the Gregorian calendar, not counting leap sec‐
onds. Some systems use other dates as their reference point.
Time-of-day clocks are usually synchronized with NTP, which means that a time‐
stamp from one machine (ideally) means the same as a timestamp on another
machine. However, time-of-day clocks also have various oddities, as described in the
next section. In particular, if the local clock is too far ahead of the NTP server, it may
be forcibly reset and appear to jump back to a previous point in time. These jumps, as
well as the fact that they often ignore leap seconds, make time-of-day clocks unsuita‐
ble for measuring elapsed time [38].
Time-of-day clocks have also historically had quite a coarse-grained resolution, e.g.,
moving forward in steps of 10 ms on older Windows systems [ 39]. On recent sys‐
tems, this is less of a problem.
Monotonic clocks
A monotonic clock is suitable for measuring a duration (time interval), such as a
timeout or a service’s response time: clock_gettime(CLOCK_MONOTONIC) on Linux
and System.nanoTime() in Java are monotonic clocks, for example. The name comes
from the fact that they are guaranteed to always move forward (whereas a time-of-
day clock may jump back in time).
288 | Chapter 8: The Trouble with Distributed Systems

You can check the value of the monotonic clock at one point in time, do something,
and then check the clock again at a later time. The difference between the two values
tells you how much time elapsed between the two checks. However, the absolute
value of the clock is meaningless: it might be the number of nanoseconds since the
computer was started, or something similarly arbitrary. In particular, it makes no
sense to compare monotonic clock values from two different computers, because they
don’t mean the same thing.
On a server with multiple CPU sockets, there may be a separate timer per CPU,
which is not necessarily synchronized with other CPUs. Operating systems compen‐
sate for any discrepancy and try to present a monotonic view of the clock to applica‐
tion threads, even as they are scheduled across different CPUs. However, it is wise to
take this guarantee of monotonicity with a pinch of salt [40].
NTP may adjust the frequency at which the monotonic clock moves forward (this is
known as slewing the clock) if it detects that the computer’s local quartz is moving
faster or slower than the NTP server. By default, NTP allows the clock rate to be spee‐
ded up or slowed down by up to 0.05%, but NTP cannot cause the monotonic clock
to jump forward or backward. The resolution of monotonic clocks is usually quite
good: on most systems they can measure time intervals in microseconds or less.
In a distributed system, using a monotonic clock for measuring elapsed time (e.g.,
timeouts) is usually fine, because it doesn’t assume any synchronization between dif‐
ferent nodes’ clocks and is not sensitive to slight inaccuracies of measurement.
Clock Synchronization and Accuracy
Monotonic clocks don’t need synchronization, but time-of-day clocks need to be set
according to an NTP server or other external time source in order to be useful.
Unfortunately, our methods for getting a clock to tell the correct time aren’t nearly as
reliable or accurate as you might hope—hardware clocks and NTP can be fickle
beasts. To give just a few examples:
• The quartz clock in a computer is not very accurate: it drifts (runs faster or
slower than it should). Clock drift varies depending on the temperature of the
machine. Google assumes a clock drift of 200 ppm (parts per million) for its
servers [41], which is equivalent to 6 ms drift for a clock that is resynchronized
with a server every 30 seconds, or 17 seconds drift for a clock that is resynchron‐
ized once a day. This drift limits the best possible accuracy you can achieve, even
if everything is working correctly.
• If a computer’s clock differs too much from an NTP server, it may refuse to syn‐
chronize, or the local clock will be forcibly reset [ 37]. Any applications observing
the time before and after this reset may see time go backward or suddenly jump
forward.
Unreliable Clocks | 289

• If a node is accidentally firewalled off from NTP servers, the misconfiguration
may go unnoticed for some time. Anecdotal evidence suggests that this does hap‐
pen in practice.
• NTP synchronization can only be as good as the network delay, so there is a limit
to its accuracy when you’re on a congested network with variable packet delays.
One experiment showed that a minimum error of 35 ms is achievable when syn‐
chronizing over the internet [42], though occasional spikes in network delay lead
to errors of around a second. Depending on the configuration, large network
delays can cause the NTP client to give up entirely.
• Some NTP servers are wrong or misconfigured, reporting time that is off by
hours [43, 44]. NTP clients are quite robust, because they query several servers
and ignore outliers. Nevertheless, it’s somewhat worrying to bet the correctness
of your systems on the time that you were told by a stranger on the internet.
• Leap seconds result in a minute that is 59 seconds or 61 seconds long, which
messes up timing assumptions in systems that are not designed with leap seconds
in mind [ 45]. The fact that leap seconds have crashed many large systems [ 38,
46] shows how easy it is for incorrect assumptions about clocks to sneak into a
system. The best way of handling leap seconds may be to make NTP servers “lie,”
by performing the leap second adjustment gradually over the course of a day
(this is known as smearing) [47, 48], although actual NTP server behavior varies
in practice [49].
• In virtual machines, the hardware clock is virtualized, which raises additional
challenges for applications that need accurate timekeeping [ 50]. When a CPU
core is shared between virtual machines, each VM is paused for tens of milli‐
seconds while another VM is running. From an application’s point of view, this
pause manifests itself as the clock suddenly jumping forward [26].
• If you run software on devices that you don’t fully control (e.g., mobile or
embedded devices), you probably cannot trust the device’s hardware clock at all.
Some users deliberately set their hardware clock to an incorrect date and time,
for example to circumvent timing limitations in games. As a result, the clock
might be set to a time wildly in the past or the future.
It is possible to achieve very good clock accuracy if you care about it sufficiently to
invest significant resources. For example, the MiFID II draft European regulation for
financial institutions requires all high-frequency trading funds to synchronize their
clocks to within 100 microseconds of UTC, in order to help debug market anomalies
such as “flash crashes” and to help detect market manipulation [ 51].
Such accuracy can be achieved using GPS receivers, the Precision Time Protocol
(PTP) [52], and careful deployment and monitoring. However, it requires significant
effort and expertise, and there are plenty of ways clock synchronization can go
290 | Chapter 8: The Trouble with Distributed Systems

wrong. If your NTP daemon is misconfigured, or a firewall is blocking NTP traffic,
the clock error due to drift can quickly become large. 
Relying on Synchronized Clocks
The problem with clocks is that while they seem simple and easy to use, they have a
surprising number of pitfalls: a day may not have exactly 86,400 seconds, time-of-day
clocks may move backward in time, and the time on one node may be quite different
from the time on another node.
Earlier in this chapter we discussed networks dropping and arbitrarily delaying pack‐
ets. Even though networks are well behaved most of the time, software must be
designed on the assumption that the network will occasionally be faulty, and the soft‐
ware must handle such faults gracefully. The same is true with clocks: although they
work quite well most of the time, robust software needs to be prepared to deal with
incorrect clocks.
Part of the problem is that incorrect clocks easily go unnoticed. If a machine’s CPU is
defective or its network is misconfigured, it most likely won’t work at all, so it will
quickly be noticed and fixed. On the other hand, if its quartz clock is defective or its
NTP client is misconfigured, most things will seem to work fine, even though its
clock gradually drifts further and further away from reality. If some piece of software
is relying on an accurately synchronized clock, the result is more likely to be silent
and subtle data loss than a dramatic crash [53, 54].
Thus, if you use software that requires synchronized clocks, it is essential that you
also carefully monitor the clock offsets between all the machines. Any node whose
clock drifts too far from the others should be declared dead and removed from the
cluster. Such monitoring ensures that you notice the broken clocks before they can
cause too much damage.
Timestamps for ordering events
Let’s consider one particular situation in which it is tempting, but dangerous, to rely
on clocks: ordering of events across multiple nodes. For example, if two clients write
to a distributed database, who got there first? Which write is the more recent one?
Figure 8-3 illustrates a dangerous use of time-of-day clocks in a database with multi-
leader replication (the example is similar to Figure 5-9). Client A writes x = 1 on node
1; the write is replicated to node 3; client B increments x on node 3 (we now have
x = 2); and finally, both writes are replicated to node 2.
Unreliable Clocks | 291

Figure 8-3. The write by client B is causally later than the write by client A, but B’s
write has an earlier timestamp.
In Figure 8-3, when a write is replicated to other nodes, it is tagged with a timestamp
according to the time-of-day clock on the node where the write originated. The clock
synchronization is very good in this example: the skew between node 1 and node 3 is
less than 3 ms, which is probably better than you can expect in practice.
Nevertheless, the timestamps in Figure 8-3 fail to order the events correctly: the write
x = 1 has a timestamp of 42.004 seconds, but the write x = 2 has a timestamp of
42.003 seconds, even though x = 2 occurred unambiguously later. When node 2
receives these two events, it will incorrectly conclude that x = 1 is the more recent
value and drop the write x = 2. In effect, client B’s increment operation will be lost.
This conflict resolution strategy is called last write wins (LWW), and it is widely used
in both multi-leader replication and leaderless databases such as Cassandra [ 53] and
Riak [54] (see “Last write wins (discarding concurrent writes)”  on page 186). Some
implementations generate timestamps on the client rather than the server, but this
doesn’t change the fundamental problems with LWW:
• Database writes can mysteriously disappear: a node with a lagging clock is unable
to overwrite values previously written by a node with a fast clock until the clock
skew between the nodes has elapsed [ 54, 55]. This scenario can cause arbitrary
amounts of data to be silently dropped without any error being reported to the
application.
• LWW cannot distinguish between writes that occurred sequentially in quick suc‐
cession (in Figure 8-3 , client B’s increment definitely occurs after client A’s
write) and writes that were truly concurrent (neither writer was aware of the
other). Additional causality tracking mechanisms, such as version vectors, are
292 | Chapter 8: The Trouble with Distributed Systems

needed in order to prevent violations of causality (see “Detecting Concurrent
Writes” on page 184 ).
• It is possible for two nodes to independently generate writes with the same time‐
stamp, especially when the clock only has millisecond resolution. An additional
tiebreaker value (which can simply be a large random number) is required to
resolve such conflicts, but this approach can also lead to violations of causality
[53].
Thus, even though it is tempting to resolve conflicts by keeping the most “recent”
value and discarding others, it’s important to be aware that the definition of “recent”
depends on a local time-of-day clock, which may well be incorrect. Even with tightly
NTP-synchronized clocks, you could send a packet at timestamp 100 ms (according
to the sender’s clock) and have it arrive at timestamp 99 ms (according to the recipi‐
ent’s clock)—so it appears as though the packet arrived before it was sent, which is
impossible.
Could NTP synchronization be made accurate enough that such incorrect orderings
cannot occur? Probably not, because NTP’s synchronization accuracy is itself limited
by the network round-trip time, in addition to other sources of error such as quartz
drift. For correct ordering, you would need the clock source to be significantly more
accurate than the thing you are measuring (namely network delay).
So-called logical clocks  [56, 57], which are based on incrementing counters rather
than an oscillating quartz crystal, are a safer alternative for ordering events (see
“Detecting Concurrent Writes”  on page 184). Logical clocks do not measure the time
of day or the number of seconds elapsed, only the relative ordering of events
(whether one event happened before or after another). In contrast, time-of-day and
monotonic clocks, which measure actual elapsed time, are also known as physical
clocks. We’ll look at ordering a bit more in “Ordering Guarantees” on page 339 .
Clock readings have a confidence interval
You may be able to read a machine’s time-of-day clock with microsecond or even
nanosecond resolution. But even if you can get such a fine-grained measurement,
that doesn’t mean the value is actually accurate to such precision. In fact, it most
likely is not—as mentioned previously, the drift in an imprecise quartz clock can
easily be several milliseconds, even if you synchronize with an NTP server on the
local network every minute. With an NTP server on the public internet, the best pos‐
sible accuracy is probably to the tens of milliseconds, and the error may easily spike
to over 100 ms when there is network congestion [57].
Thus, it doesn’t make sense to think of a clock reading as a point in time—it is more
like a range of times, within a confidence interval: for example, a system may be 95%
confident that the time now is between 10.3 and 10.5 seconds past the minute, but it
Unreliable Clocks | 293

doesn’t know any more precisely than that [ 58]. If we only know the time +/– 100 ms,
the microsecond digits in the timestamp are essentially meaningless.
The uncertainty bound can be calculated based on your time source. If you have a
GPS receiver or atomic (caesium) clock directly attached to your computer, the
expected error range is reported by the manufacturer. If you’re getting the time from
a server, the uncertainty is based on the expected quartz drift since your last sync
with the server, plus the NTP server’s uncertainty, plus the network round-trip time
to the server (to a first approximation, and assuming you trust the server).
Unfortunately, most systems don’t expose this uncertainty: for example, when you
call clock_gettime(), the return value doesn’t tell you the expected error of the
timestamp, so you don’t know if its confidence interval is five milliseconds or five
years.
An interesting exception is Google’s TrueTime API in Spanner [ 41], which explicitly
reports the confidence interval on the local clock. When you ask it for the current
time, you get back two values: [earliest, latest], which are the earliest possible
and the latest possible  timestamp. Based on its uncertainty calculations, the clock
knows that the actual current time is somewhere within that interval. The width of
the interval depends, among other things, on how long it has been since the local
quartz clock was last synchronized with a more accurate clock source. 
Synchronized clocks for global snapshots
In “Snapshot Isolation and Repeatable Read” on page 237 we discussed snapshot iso‐
lation, which is a very useful feature in databases that need to support both small, fast
read-write transactions and large, long-running read-only transactions (e.g., for
backups or analytics). It allows read-only transactions to see the database in a consis‐
tent state at a particular point in time, without locking and interfering with read-
write transactions.
The most common implementation of snapshot isolation requires a monotonically
increasing transaction ID. If a write happened later than the snapshot (i.e., the write
has a greater transaction ID than the snapshot), that write is invisible to the snapshot
transaction. On a single-node database, a simple counter is sufficient for generating
transaction IDs.
However, when a database is distributed across many machines, potentially in multi‐
ple datacenters, a global, monotonically increasing transaction ID (across all parti‐
tions) is difficult to generate, because it requires coordination. The transaction ID
must reflect causality: if transaction B reads a value that was written by transaction A,
then B must have a higher transaction ID than A—otherwise, the snapshot would not
294 | Chapter 8: The Trouble with Distributed Systems

vi. There are distributed sequence number generators, such as Twitter’s Snowflake, that generate approxi‐
mately monotonically increasing unique IDs in a scalable way (e.g., by allocating blocks of the ID space to
different nodes). However, they typically cannot guarantee an ordering that is consistent with causality,
because the timescale at which blocks of IDs are assigned is longer than the timescale of database reads and
writes. See also “Ordering Guarantees” on page 339 .
be consistent. With lots of small, rapid transactions, creating transaction IDs in a dis‐
tributed system becomes an untenable bottleneck.vi
Can we use the timestamps from synchronized time-of-day clocks as transaction IDs?
If we could get the synchronization good enough, they would have the right proper‐
ties: later transactions have a higher timestamp. The problem, of course, is the uncer‐
tainty about clock accuracy.
Spanner implements snapshot isolation across datacenters in this way [59, 60]. It uses
the clock’s confidence interval as reported by the TrueTime API, and is based on the
following observation: if you have two confidence intervals, each consisting of an ear‐
liest and latest possible timestamp ( A = [ Aearliest, Alatest] and B = [ Bearliest, Blatest]), and
those two intervals do not overlap (i.e., Aearliest < Alatest < Bearliest < Blatest), then B defi‐
nitely happened after A—there can be no doubt. Only if the intervals overlap are we
unsure in which order A and B happened.
In order to ensure that transaction timestamps reflect causality, Spanner deliberately
waits for the length of the confidence interval before committing a read-write trans‐
action. By doing so, it ensures that any transaction that may read the data is at a suffi‐
ciently later time, so their confidence intervals do not overlap. In order to keep the
wait time as short as possible, Spanner needs to keep the clock uncertainty as small as
possible; for this purpose, Google deploys a GPS receiver or atomic clock in each
datacenter, allowing clocks to be synchronized to within about 7 ms [41].
Using clock synchronization for distributed transaction semantics is an area of active
research [57, 61, 62]. These ideas are interesting, but they have not yet been imple‐
mented in mainstream databases outside of Google. 
Process Pauses
Let’s consider another example of dangerous clock use in a distributed system. Say
you have a database with a single leader per partition. Only the leader is allowed to
accept writes. How does a node know that it is still leader (that it hasn’t been declared
dead by the others), and that it may safely accept writes?
One option is for the leader to obtain a lease from the other nodes, which is similar to
a lock with a timeout [ 63]. Only one node can hold the lease at any one time—thus,
when a node obtains a lease, it knows that it is the leader for some amount of time,
until the lease expires. In order to remain leader, the node must periodically renew
Unreliable Clocks | 295

the lease before it expires. If the node fails, it stops renewing the lease, so another
node can take over when it expires.
You can imagine the request-handling loop looking something like this:
while (true) {
    request = getIncomingRequest();
    // Ensure that the lease always has at least 10 seconds remaining
    if (lease.expiryTimeMillis - System.currentTimeMillis() < 10000) {
        lease = lease.renew();
    }
    if (lease.isValid()) {
        process(request);
    }
}
What’s wrong with this code? Firstly, it’s relying on synchronized clocks: the expiry
time on the lease is set by a different machine (where the expiry may be calculated as
the current time plus 30 seconds, for example), and it’s being compared to the local
system clock. If the clocks are out of sync by more than a few seconds, this code will
start doing strange things.
Secondly, even if we change the protocol to only use the local monotonic clock, there
is another problem: the code assumes that very little time passes between the point
that it checks the time ( System.currentTimeMillis()) and the time when the
request is processed ( process(request)). Normally this code runs very quickly, so
the 10 second buffer is more than enough to ensure that the lease doesn’t expire in
the middle of processing a request.
However, what if there is an unexpected pause in the execution of the program? For
example, imagine the thread stops for 15 seconds around the line lease.isValid()
before finally continuing. In that case, it’s likely that the lease will have expired by the
time the request is processed, and another node has already taken over as leader.
However, there is nothing to tell this thread that it was paused for so long, so this
code won’t notice that the lease has expired until the next iteration of the loop—by
which time it may have already done something unsafe by processing the request.
Is it crazy to assume that a thread might be paused for so long? Unfortunately not.
There are various reasons why this could happen:
• Many programming language runtimes (such as the Java Virtual Machine) have
a garbage collector  (GC) that occasionally needs to stop all running threads.
These “stop-the-world” GC pauses  have sometimes been known to last for several
minutes [ 64]! Even so-called “concurrent” garbage collectors like the HotSpot
JVM’s CMS cannot fully run in parallel with the application code—even they
need to stop the world from time to time [ 65]. Although the pauses can often be
296 | Chapter 8: The Trouble with Distributed Systems

reduced by changing allocation patterns or tuning GC settings [ 66], we must
assume the worst if we want to offer robust guarantees.
• In virtualized environments, a virtual machine can be suspended (pausing the
execution of all processes and saving the contents of memory to disk) and
resumed (restoring the contents of memory and continuing execution). This
pause can occur at any time in a process’s execution and can last for an arbitrary
length of time. This feature is sometimes used for live migration  of virtual
machines from one host to another without a reboot, in which case the length of
the pause depends on the rate at which processes are writing to memory [67].
• On end-user devices such as laptops, execution may also be suspended and
resumed arbitrarily, e.g., when the user closes the lid of their laptop.
• When the operating system context-switches to another thread, or when the
hypervisor switches to a different virtual machine (when running in a virtual
machine), the currently running thread can be paused at any arbitrary point in
the code. In the case of a virtual machine, the CPU time spent in other virtual
machines is known as steal time. If the machine is under heavy load—i.e., if there
is a long queue of threads waiting to run—it may take some time before the
paused thread gets to run again.
• If the application performs synchronous disk access, a thread may be paused
waiting for a slow disk I/O operation to complete [ 68]. In many languages, disk
access can happen surprisingly, even if the code doesn’t explicitly mention file
access—for example, the Java classloader lazily loads class files when they are first
used, which could happen at any time in the program execution. I/O pauses and
GC pauses may even conspire to combine their delays [ 69]. If the disk is actually
a network filesystem or network block device (such as Amazon’s EBS), the I/O
latency is further subject to the variability of network delays [29].
• If the operating system is configured to allow swapping to disk (paging), a simple
memory access may result in a page fault that requires a page from disk to be
loaded into memory. The thread is paused while this slow I/O operation takes
place. If memory pressure is high, this may in turn require a different page to be
swapped out to disk. In extreme circumstances, the operating system may spend
most of its time swapping pages in and out of memory and getting little actual
work done (this is known as thrashing). To avoid this problem, paging is often
disabled on server machines (if you would rather kill a process to free up mem‐
ory than risk thrashing).
• A Unix process can be paused by sending it the SIGSTOP signal, for example by
pressing Ctrl-Z in a shell. This signal immediately stops the process from getting
any more CPU cycles until it is resumed with SIGCONT, at which point it contin‐
ues running where it left off. Even if your environment does not normally use
SIGSTOP, it might be sent accidentally by an operations engineer.
Unreliable Clocks | 297

All of these occurrences can preempt the running thread at any point and resume it at
some later time, without the thread even noticing. The problem is similar to making
multi-threaded code on a single machine thread-safe: you can’t assume anything
about timing, because arbitrary context switches and parallelism may occur.
When writing multi-threaded code on a single machine, we have fairly good tools for
making it thread-safe: mutexes, semaphores, atomic counters, lock-free data struc‐
tures, blocking queues, and so on. Unfortunately, these tools don’t directly translate
to distributed systems, because a distributed system has no shared memory—only
messages sent over an unreliable network.
A node in a distributed system must assume that its execution can be paused for a
significant length of time at any point, even in the middle of a function. During the
pause, the rest of the world keeps moving and may even declare the paused node
dead because it’s not responding. Eventually, the paused node may continue running,
without even noticing that it was asleep until it checks its clock sometime later. 
Response time guarantees
In many programming languages and operating systems, threads and processes may
pause for an unbounded amount of time, as discussed. Those reasons for pausing can
be eliminated if you try hard enough.
Some software runs in environments where a failure to respond within a specified
time can cause serious damage: computers that control aircraft, rockets, robots, cars,
and other physical objects must respond quickly and predictably to their sensor
inputs. In these systems, there is a specified deadline by which the software must
respond; if it doesn’t meet the deadline, that may cause a failure of the entire system.
These are so-called hard real-time systems.
Is real-time really real?
In embedded systems, real-time means that a system is carefully
designed and tested to meet specified timing guarantees in all cir‐
cumstances. This meaning is in contrast to the more vague use of
the term real-time on the web, where it describes servers pushing
data to clients and stream processing without hard response time
constraints (see Chapter 11).
For example, if your car’s onboard sensors detect that you are currently experiencing
a crash, you wouldn’t want the release of the airbag to be delayed due to an inoppor‐
tune GC pause in the airbag release system.
Providing real-time guarantees in a system requires support from all levels of the
software stack: a real-time operating system (RTOS) that allows processes to be sched‐
uled with a guaranteed allocation of CPU time in specified intervals is needed; library
298 | Chapter 8: The Trouble with Distributed Systems

functions must document their worst-case execution times; dynamic memory alloca‐
tion may be restricted or disallowed entirely (real-time garbage collectors exist, but
the application must still ensure that it doesn’t give the GC too much work to do);
and an enormous amount of testing and measurement must be done to ensure that
guarantees are being met.
All of this requires a large amount of additional work and severely restricts the range
of programming languages, libraries, and tools that can be used (since most lan‐
guages and tools do not provide real-time guarantees). For these reasons, developing
real-time systems is very expensive, and they are most commonly used in safety-
critical embedded devices. Moreover, “real-time” is not the same as “high-
performance”—in fact, real-time systems may have lower throughput, since they
have to prioritize timely responses above all else (see also “Latency and Resource Uti‐
lization” on page 286 ).
For most server-side data processing systems, real-time guarantees are simply not
economical or appropriate. Consequently, these systems must suffer the pauses and
clock instability that come from operating in a non-real-time environment.
Limiting the impact of garbage collection
The negative effects of process pauses can be mitigated without resorting to expen‐
sive real-time scheduling guarantees. Language runtimes have some flexibility
around when they schedule garbage collections, because they can track the rate of
object allocation and the remaining free memory over time.
An emerging idea is to treat GC pauses like brief planned outages of a node, and to
let other nodes handle requests from clients while one node is collecting its garbage.
If the runtime can warn the application that a node soon requires a GC pause, the
application can stop sending new requests to that node, wait for it to finish process‐
ing outstanding requests, and then perform the GC while no requests are in progress.
This trick hides GC pauses from clients and reduces the high percentiles of response
time [70, 71]. Some latency-sensitive financial trading systems [72] use this approach.
A variant of this idea is to use the garbage collector only for short-lived objects
(which are fast to collect) and to restart processes periodically, before they accumu‐
late enough long-lived objects to require a full GC of long-lived objects [ 65, 73]. One
node can be restarted at a time, and traffic can be shifted away from the node before
the planned restart, like in a rolling upgrade (see Chapter 4).
These measures cannot fully prevent garbage collection pauses, but they can usefully
reduce their impact on the application. 
Unreliable Clocks | 299