Knowledge, Truth, and Lies
So far in this chapter we have explored the ways in which distributed systems are dif‐
ferent from programs running on a single computer: there is no shared memory, only
message passing via an unreliable network with variable delays, and the systems may
suffer from partial failures, unreliable clocks, and processing pauses.
The consequences of these issues are profoundly disorienting if you’re not used to
distributed systems. A node in the network cannot know anything for sure—it can
only make guesses based on the messages it receives (or doesn’t receive) via the net‐
work. A node can only find out what state another node is in (what data it has stored,
whether it is correctly functioning, etc.) by exchanging messages with it. If a remote
node doesn’t respond, there is no way of knowing what state it is in, because prob‐
lems in the network cannot reliably be distinguished from problems at a node.
Discussions of these systems border on the philosophical: What do we know to be
true or false in our system? How sure can we be of that knowledge, if the mechanisms
for perception and measurement are unreliable? Should software systems obey the
laws that we expect of the physical world, such as cause and effect?
Fortunately, we don’t need to go as far as figuring out the meaning of life. In a dis‐
tributed system, we can state the assumptions we are making about the behavior (the
system model) and design the actual system in such a way that it meets those assump‐
tions. Algorithms can be proved to function correctly within a certain system model.
This means that reliable behavior is achievable, even if the underlying system model
provides very few guarantees.
However, although it is possible to make software well behaved in an unreliable sys‐
tem model, it is not straightforward to do so. In the rest of this chapter we will further
explore the notions of knowledge and truth in distributed systems, which will help us
think about the kinds of assumptions we can make and the guarantees we may want
to provide. In Chapter 9 we will proceed to look at some examples of distributed sys‐
tems, algorithms that provide particular guarantees under particular assumptions.
The Truth Is Defined by the Majority
Imagine a network with an asymmetric fault: a node is able to receive all messages
sent to it, but any outgoing messages from that node are dropped or delayed [ 19].
Even though that node is working perfectly well, and is receiving requests from other
nodes, the other nodes cannot hear its responses. After some timeout, the other
nodes declare it dead, because they haven’t heard from the node. The situation
unfolds like a nightmare: the semi-disconnected node is dragged to the graveyard,
kicking and screaming “I’m not dead!”—but since nobody can hear its screaming, the
funeral procession continues with stoic determination.
300 | Chapter 8: The Trouble with Distributed Systems

In a slightly less nightmarish scenario, the semi-disconnected node may notice that
the messages it is sending are not being acknowledged by other nodes, and so realize
that there must be a fault in the network. Nevertheless, the node is wrongly declared
dead by the other nodes, and the semi-disconnected node cannot do anything about
it.
As a third scenario, imagine a node that experiences a long stop-the-world garbage
collection pause. All of the node’s threads are preempted by the GC and paused for
one minute, and consequently, no requests are processed and no responses are sent.
The other nodes wait, retry, grow impatient, and eventually declare the node dead
and load it onto the hearse. Finally, the GC finishes and the node’s threads continue
as if nothing had happened. The other nodes are surprised as the supposedly dead
node suddenly raises its head out of the coffin, in full health, and starts cheerfully
chatting with bystanders. At first, the GCing node doesn’t even realize that an entire
minute has passed and that it was declared dead—from its perspective, hardly any
time has passed since it was last talking to the other nodes.
The moral of these stories is that a node cannot necessarily trust its own judgment of
a situation. A distributed system cannot exclusively rely on a single node, because a
node may fail at any time, potentially leaving the system stuck and unable to recover.
Instead, many distributed algorithms rely on a quorum, that is, voting among the
nodes (see “Quorums for reading and writing” on page 179): decisions require some
minimum number of votes from several nodes in order to reduce the dependence on
any one particular node.
That includes decisions about declaring nodes dead. If a quorum of nodes declares
another node dead, then it must be considered dead, even if that node still very much
feels alive. The individual node must abide by the quorum decision and step down.
Most commonly, the quorum is an absolute majority of more than half the nodes
(although other kinds of quorums are possible). A majority quorum allows the sys‐
tem to continue working if individual nodes have failed (with three nodes, one failure
can be tolerated; with five nodes, two failures can be tolerated). However, it is still
safe, because there can only be only one majority in the system—there cannot be two
majorities with conflicting decisions at the same time. We will discuss the use of quo‐
rums in more detail when we get to consensus algorithms in Chapter 9.
The leader and the lock
Frequently, a system requires there to be only one of some thing. For example:
• Only one node is allowed to be the leader for a database partition, to avoid split
brain (see “Handling Node Outages” on page 156 ).
• Only one transaction or client is allowed to hold the lock for a particular resource
or object, to prevent concurrently writing to it and corrupting it.
Knowledge, Truth, and Lies | 301

• Only one user is allowed to register a particular username, because a username
must uniquely identify a user.
Implementing this in a distributed system requires care: even if a node believes that it
is “the chosen one” (the leader of the partition, the holder of the lock, the request
handler of the user who successfully grabbed the username), that doesn’t necessarily
mean a quorum of nodes agrees! A node may have formerly been the leader, but if
the other nodes declared it dead in the meantime (e.g., due to a network interruption
or GC pause), it may have been demoted and another leader may have already been
elected.
If a node continues acting as the chosen one, even though the majority of nodes have
declared it dead, it could cause problems in a system that is not carefully designed.
Such a node could send messages to other nodes in its self-appointed capacity, and if
other nodes believe it, the system as a whole may do something incorrect.
For example, Figure 8-4 shows a data corruption bug due to an incorrect implemen‐
tation of locking. (The bug is not theoretical: HBase used to have this problem [ 74,
75].) Say you want to ensure that a file in a storage service can only be accessed by
one client at a time, because if multiple clients tried to write to it, the file would
become corrupted. You try to implement this by requiring a client to obtain a lease
from a lock service before accessing the file.
Figure 8-4. Incorrect implementation of a distributed lock: client 1 believes that it still
has a valid lease, even though it has expired, and thus corrupts a file in storage.
The problem is an example of what we discussed in “Process Pauses”  on page 295: if
the client holding the lease is paused for too long, its lease expires. Another client can
obtain a lease for the same file, and start writing to the file. When the paused client
comes back, it believes (incorrectly) that it still has a valid lease and proceeds to also
write to the file. As a result, the clients’ writes clash and corrupt the file.
302 | Chapter 8: The Trouble with Distributed Systems

Fencing tokens
When using a lock or lease to protect access to some resource, such as the file storage
in Figure 8-4, we need to ensure that a node that is under a false belief of being “the
chosen one” cannot disrupt the rest of the system. A fairly simple technique that ach‐
ieves this goal is called fencing, and is illustrated in Figure 8-5.
Figure 8-5. Making access to storage safe by allowing writes only in the order of increas‐
ing fencing tokens.
Let’s assume that every time the lock server grants a lock or lease, it also returns a
fencing token , which is a number that increases every time a lock is granted (e.g.,
incremented by the lock service). We can then require that every time a client sends a
write request to the storage service, it must include its current fencing token.
In Figure 8-5, client 1 acquires the lease with a token of 33, but then it goes into a
long pause and the lease expires. Client 2 acquires the lease with a token of 34 (the
number always increases) and then sends its write request to the storage service,
including the token of 34. Later, client 1 comes back to life and sends its write to the
storage service, including its token value 33. However, the storage server remembers
that it has already processed a write with a higher token number (34), and so it rejects
the request with token 33.
If ZooKeeper is used as lock service, the transaction ID zxid or the node version
cversion can be used as fencing token. Since they are guaranteed to be monotoni‐
cally increasing, they have the required properties [74].
Note that this mechanism requires the resource itself to take an active role in check‐
ing tokens by rejecting any writes with an older token than one that has already been
processed—it is not sufficient to rely on clients checking their lock status themselves.
For resources that do not explicitly support fencing tokens, you might still be able
work around the limitation (for example, in the case of a file storage service you
could include the fencing token in the filename). However, some kind of check is
necessary to avoid processing requests outside of the lock’s protection.
Knowledge, Truth, and Lies | 303

Checking a token on the server side may seem like a downside, but it is arguably a
good thing: it is unwise for a service to assume that its clients will always be well
behaved, because the clients are often run by people whose priorities are very differ‐
ent from the priorities of the people running the service [ 76]. Thus, it is a good idea
for any service to protect itself from accidentally abusive clients. 
Byzantine Faults
Fencing tokens can detect and block a node that is inadvertently acting in error (e.g.,
because it hasn’t yet found out that its lease has expired). However, if the node delib‐
erately wanted to subvert the system’s guarantees, it could easily do so by sending
messages with a fake fencing token.
In this book we assume that nodes are unreliable but honest: they may be slow or
never respond (due to a fault), and their state may be outdated (due to a GC pause or
network delays), but we assume that if a node does respond, it is telling the “truth”: to
the best of its knowledge, it is playing by the rules of the protocol.
Distributed systems problems become much harder if there is a risk that nodes may
“lie” (send arbitrary faulty or corrupted responses)—for example, if a node may claim
to have received a particular message when in fact it didn’t. Such behavior is known
as a Byzantine fault, and the problem of reaching consensus in this untrusting envi‐
ronment is known as the Byzantine Generals Problem [77].
The Byzantine Generals Problem
The Byzantine Generals Problem is a generalization of the so-called Two Generals
Problem [78], which imagines a situation in which two army generals need to agree
on a battle plan. As they have set up camp on two different sites, they can only com‐
municate by messenger, and the messengers sometimes get delayed or lost (like pack‐
ets in a network). We will discuss this problem of consensus in Chapter 9.
In the Byzantine version of the problem, there are n generals who need to agree, and
their endeavor is hampered by the fact that there are some traitors in their midst.
Most of the generals are loyal, and thus send truthful messages, but the traitors may
try to deceive and confuse the others by sending fake or untrue messages (while try‐
ing to remain undiscovered). It is not known in advance who the traitors are.
Byzantium was an ancient Greek city that later became Constantinople, in the place
which is now Istanbul in Turkey. There isn’t any historic evidence that the generals of
Byzantium were any more prone to intrigue and conspiracy than those elsewhere.
Rather, the name is derived from Byzantine in the sense of excessively complicated,
bureaucratic, devious, which was used in politics long before computers [ 79]. Lamp‐
ort wanted to choose a nationality that would not offend any readers, and he was
advised that calling it The Albanian Generals Problem was not such a good idea [80].
304 | Chapter 8: The Trouble with Distributed Systems

A system is Byzantine fault-tolerant if it continues to operate correctly even if some
of the nodes are malfunctioning and not obeying the protocol, or if malicious attack‐
ers are interfering with the network. This concern is relevant in certain specific cir‐
cumstances. For example:
• In aerospace environments, the data in a computer’s memory or CPU register
could become corrupted by radiation, leading it to respond to other nodes in
arbitrarily unpredictable ways. Since a system failure would be very expensive
(e.g., an aircraft crashing and killing everyone on board, or a rocket colliding
with the International Space Station), flight control systems must tolerate Byzan‐
tine faults [81, 82].
• In a system with multiple participating organizations, some participants may
attempt to cheat or defraud others. In such circumstances, it is not safe for a
node to simply trust another node’s messages, since they may be sent with mali‐
cious intent. For example, peer-to-peer networks like Bitcoin and other block‐
chains can be considered to be a way of getting mutually untrusting parties to
agree whether a transaction happened or not, without relying on a central
authority [83].
However, in the kinds of systems we discuss in this book, we can usually safely
assume that there are no Byzantine faults. In your datacenter, all the nodes are con‐
trolled by your organization (so they can hopefully be trusted) and radiation levels
are low enough that memory corruption is not a major problem. Protocols for mak‐
ing systems Byzantine fault-tolerant are quite complicated [ 84], and fault-tolerant
embedded systems rely on support from the hardware level [ 81]. In most server-side
data systems, the cost of deploying Byzantine fault-tolerant solutions makes them
impractical.
Web applications do need to expect arbitrary and malicious behavior of clients that
are under end-user control, such as web browsers. This is why input validation, sani‐
tization, and output escaping are so important: to prevent SQL injection and cross-
site scripting, for example. However, we typically don’t use Byzantine fault-tolerant
protocols here, but simply make the server the authority on deciding what client
behavior is and isn’t allowed. In peer-to-peer networks, where there is no such cen‐
tral authority, Byzantine fault tolerance is more relevant.
A bug in the software could be regarded as a Byzantine fault, but if you deploy the
same software to all nodes, then a Byzantine fault-tolerant algorithm cannot save you.
Most Byzantine fault-tolerant algorithms require a supermajority of more than two-
thirds of the nodes to be functioning correctly (i.e., if you have four nodes, at most
one may malfunction). To use this approach against bugs, you would have to have
four independent implementations of the same software and hope that a bug only
appears in one of the four implementations.
Knowledge, Truth, and Lies | 305

Similarly, it would be appealing if a protocol could protect us from vulnerabilities,
security compromises, and malicious attacks. Unfortunately, this is not realistic
either: in most systems, if an attacker can compromise one node, they can probably
compromise all of them, because they are probably running the same software. Thus,
traditional mechanisms (authentication, access control, encryption, firewalls, and so
on) continue to be the main protection against attackers.
Weak forms of lying
Although we assume that nodes are generally honest, it can be worth adding mecha‐
nisms to software that guard against weak forms of “lying”—for example, invalid
messages due to hardware issues, software bugs, and misconfiguration. Such protec‐
tion mechanisms are not full-blown Byzantine fault tolerance, as they would not
withstand a determined adversary, but they are nevertheless simple and pragmatic
steps toward better reliability. For example:
• Network packets do sometimes get corrupted due to hardware issues or bugs in
operating systems, drivers, routers, etc. Usually, corrupted packets are caught by
the checksums built into TCP and UDP, but sometimes they evade detection [ 85,
86, 87]. Simple measures are usually sufficient protection against such corrup‐
tion, such as checksums in the application-level protocol.
• A publicly accessible application must carefully sanitize any inputs from users,
for example checking that a value is within a reasonable range and limiting the
size of strings to prevent denial of service through large memory allocations. An
internal service behind a firewall may be able to get away with less strict checks
on inputs, but some basic sanity-checking of values (e.g., in protocol parsing
[85]) is a good idea.
• NTP clients can be configured with multiple server addresses. When synchroniz‐
ing, the client contacts all of them, estimates their errors, and checks that a
majority of servers agree on some time range. As long as most of the servers are
okay, a misconfigured NTP server that is reporting an incorrect time is detected
as an outlier and is excluded from synchronization [ 37]. The use of multiple
servers makes NTP more robust than if it only uses a single server. 
System Model and Reality
Many algorithms have been designed to solve distributed systems problems—for
example, we will examine solutions for the consensus problem in Chapter 9. In order
to be useful, these algorithms need to tolerate the various faults of distributed systems
that we discussed in this chapter.
Algorithms need to be written in a way that does not depend too heavily on the
details of the hardware and software configuration on which they are run. This in
306 | Chapter 8: The Trouble with Distributed Systems

turn requires that we somehow formalize the kinds of faults that we expect to happen
in a system. We do this by defining a system model , which is an abstraction that
describes what things an algorithm may assume.
With regard to timing assumptions, three system models are in common use:
Synchronous model
The synchronous model assumes bounded network delay, bounded process pau‐
ses, and bounded clock error. This does not imply exactly synchronized clocks or
zero network delay; it just means you know that network delay, pauses, and clock
drift will never exceed some fixed upper bound [ 88]. The synchronous model is
not a realistic model of most practical systems, because (as discussed in this
chapter) unbounded delays and pauses do occur.
Partially synchronous model
Partial synchrony means that a system behaves like a synchronous system most of
the time, but it sometimes exceeds the bounds for network delay, process pauses,
and clock drift [ 88]. This is a realistic model of many systems: most of the time,
networks and processes are quite well behaved—otherwise we would never be
able to get anything done—but we have to reckon with the fact that any timing
assumptions may be shattered occasionally. When this happens, network delay,
pauses, and clock error may become arbitrarily large.
Asynchronous model
In this model, an algorithm is not allowed to make any timing assumptions—in
fact, it does not even have a clock (so it cannot use timeouts). Some algorithms
can be designed for the asynchronous model, but it is very restrictive.
Moreover, besides timing issues, we have to consider node failures. The three most
common system models for nodes are:
Crash-stop faults
In the crash-stop model, an algorithm may assume that a node can fail in only
one way, namely by crashing. This means that the node may suddenly stop
responding at any moment, and thereafter that node is gone forever—it never
comes back.
Crash-recovery faults
We assume that nodes may crash at any moment, and perhaps start responding
again after some unknown time. In the crash-recovery model, nodes are assumed
to have stable storage (i.e., nonvolatile disk storage) that is preserved across
crashes, while the in-memory state is assumed to be lost.
Byzantine (arbitrary) faults
Nodes may do absolutely anything, including trying to trick and deceive other
nodes, as described in the last section.
Knowledge, Truth, and Lies | 307

For modeling real systems, the partially synchronous model with crash-recovery
faults is generally the most useful model. But how do distributed algorithms cope
with that model?
Correctness of an algorithm
To define what it means for an algorithm to be correct, we can describe its properties.
For example, the output of a sorting algorithm has the property that for any two dis‐
tinct elements of the output list, the element further to the left is smaller than the ele‐
ment further to the right. That is simply a formal way of defining what it means for a
list to be sorted.
Similarly, we can write down the properties we want of a distributed algorithm to
define what it means to be correct. For example, if we are generating fencing tokens
for a lock (see “Fencing tokens” on page 303), we may require the algorithm to have
the following properties:
Uniqueness
No two requests for a fencing token return the same value.
Monotonic sequence
If request x returned token tx, and request y returned token ty, and x completed
before y began, then tx < ty.
Availability
A node that requests a fencing token and does not crash eventually receives a
response.
An algorithm is correct in some system model if it always satisfies its properties in all
situations that we assume may occur in that system model. But how does this make
sense? If all nodes crash, or all network delays suddenly become infinitely long, then
no algorithm will be able to get anything done.
Safety and liveness
To clarify the situation, it is worth distinguishing between two different kinds of
properties: safety and liveness properties. In the example just given, uniqueness and
monotonic sequence are safety properties, but availability is a liveness property.
What distinguishes the two kinds of properties? A giveaway is that liveness properties
often include the word “eventually” in their definition. (And yes, you guessed it—
eventual consistency is a liveness property [89].)
Safety is often informally defined as nothing bad happens , and liveness as something
good eventually happens. However, it’s best to not read too much into those informal
definitions, because the meaning of good and bad is subjective. The actual definitions
of safety and liveness are precise and mathematical [90]:
308 | Chapter 8: The Trouble with Distributed Systems

• If a safety property is violated, we can point at a particular point in time at which
it was broken (for example, if the uniqueness property was violated, we can iden‐
tify the particular operation in which a duplicate fencing token was returned).
After a safety property has been violated, the violation cannot be undone—the
damage is already done.
• A liveness property works the other way round: it may not hold at some point in
time (for example, a node may have sent a request but not yet received a
response), but there is always hope that it may be satisfied in the future (namely
by receiving a response).
An advantage of distinguishing between safety and liveness properties is that it helps
us deal with difficult system models. For distributed algorithms, it is common to
require that safety properties always hold, in all possible situations of a system model
[88]. That is, even if all nodes crash, or the entire network fails, the algorithm must
nevertheless ensure that it does not return a wrong result (i.e., that the safety proper‐
ties remain satisfied).
However, with liveness properties we are allowed to make caveats: for example, we
could say that a request needs to receive a response only if a majority of nodes have
not crashed, and only if the network eventually recovers from an outage. The defini‐
tion of the partially synchronous model requires that eventually the system returns to
a synchronous state—that is, any period of network interruption lasts only for a finite
duration and is then repaired.
Mapping system models to the real world
Safety and liveness properties and system models are very useful for reasoning about
the correctness of a distributed algorithm. However, when implementing an algo‐
rithm in practice, the messy facts of reality come back to bite you again, and it
becomes clear that the system model is a simplified abstraction of reality.
For example, algorithms in the crash-recovery model generally assume that data in
stable storage survives crashes. However, what happens if the data on disk is corrup‐
ted, or the data is wiped out due to hardware error or misconfiguration [ 91]? What
happens if a server has a firmware bug and fails to recognize its hard drives on
reboot, even though the drives are correctly attached to the server [92]?
Quorum algorithms (see “Quorums for reading and writing”  on page 179) rely on a
node remembering the data that it claims to have stored. If a node may suffer from
amnesia and forget previously stored data, that breaks the quorum condition, and
thus breaks the correctness of the algorithm. Perhaps a new system model is needed,
in which we assume that stable storage mostly survives crashes, but may sometimes
be lost. But that model then becomes harder to reason about.
Knowledge, Truth, and Lies | 309

The theoretical description of an algorithm can declare that certain things are simply
assumed not to happen—and in non-Byzantine systems, we do have to make some
assumptions about faults that can and cannot happen. However, a real implementa‐
tion may still have to include code to handle the case where something happens that
was assumed to be impossible, even if that handling boils down to printf("Sucks to
be you")  and exit(666)—i.e., letting a human operator clean up the mess [ 93].
(This is arguably the difference between computer science and software engineering.)
That is not to say that theoretical, abstract system models are worthless—quite the
opposite. They are incredibly helpful for distilling down the complexity of real sys‐
tems to a manageable set of faults that we can reason about, so that we can under‐
stand the problem and try to solve it systematically. We can prove algorithms correct
by showing that their properties always hold in some system model.
Proving an algorithm correct does not mean its implementation on a real system will
necessarily always behave correctly. But it’s a very good first step, because the theo‐
retical analysis can uncover problems in an algorithm that might remain hidden for a
long time in a real system, and that only come to bite you when your assumptions
(e.g., about timing) are defeated due to unusual circumstances. Theoretical analysis
and empirical testing are equally important. 
Summary
In this chapter we have discussed a wide range of problems that can occur in dis‐
tributed systems, including:
• Whenever you try to send a packet over the network, it may be lost or arbitrarily
delayed. Likewise, the reply may be lost or delayed, so if you don’t get a reply,
you have no idea whether the message got through.
• A node’s clock may be significantly out of sync with other nodes (despite your
best efforts to set up NTP), it may suddenly jump forward or back in time, and
relying on it is dangerous because you most likely don’t have a good measure of
your clock’s error interval.
• A process may pause for a substantial amount of time at any point in its execu‐
tion (perhaps due to a stop-the-world garbage collector), be declared dead by
other nodes, and then come back to life again without realizing that it was
paused.
The fact that such partial failures  can occur is the defining characteristic of dis‐
tributed systems. Whenever software tries to do anything involving other nodes,
there is the possibility that it may occasionally fail, or randomly go slow, or not
respond at all (and eventually time out). In distributed systems, we try to build toler‐
310 | Chapter 8: The Trouble with Distributed Systems

ance of partial failures into software, so that the system as a whole may continue
functioning even when some of its constituent parts are broken.
To tolerate faults, the first step is to detect them, but even that is hard. Most systems
don’t have an accurate mechanism of detecting whether a node has failed, so most
distributed algorithms rely on timeouts to determine whether a remote node is still
available. However, timeouts can’t distinguish between network and node failures,
and variable network delay sometimes causes a node to be falsely suspected of crash‐
ing. Moreover, sometimes a node can be in a degraded state: for example, a Gigabit
network interface could suddenly drop to 1 Kb/s throughput due to a driver bug [ 94].
Such a node that is “limping” but not dead can be even more difficult to deal with
than a cleanly failed node.
Once a fault is detected, making a system tolerate it is not easy either: there is no
global variable, no shared memory, no common knowledge or any other kind of
shared state between the machines. Nodes can’t even agree on what time it is, let
alone on anything more profound. The only way information can flow from one
node to another is by sending it over the unreliable network. Major decisions cannot
be safely made by a single node, so we require protocols that enlist help from other
nodes and try to get a quorum to agree.
If you’re used to writing software in the idealized mathematical perfection of a single
computer, where the same operation always deterministically returns the same result,
then moving to the messy physical reality of distributed systems can be a bit of a
shock. Conversely, distributed systems engineers will often regard a problem as triv‐
ial if it can be solved on a single computer [ 5], and indeed a single computer can do a
lot nowadays [95]. If you can avoid opening Pandora’s box and simply keep things on
a single machine, it is generally worth doing so.
However, as discussed in the introduction to Part II, scalability is not the only reason
for wanting to use a distributed system. Fault tolerance and low latency (by placing
data geographically close to users) are equally important goals, and those things can‐
not be achieved with a single node.
In this chapter we also went on some tangents to explore whether the unreliability of
networks, clocks, and processes is an inevitable law of nature. We saw that it isn’t: it
is possible to give hard real-time response guarantees and bounded delays in net‐
works, but doing so is very expensive and results in lower utilization of hardware
resources. Most non-safety-critical systems choose cheap and unreliable over expen‐
sive and reliable.
We also touched on supercomputers, which assume reliable components and thus
have to be stopped and restarted entirely when a component does fail. By contrast,
distributed systems can run forever without being interrupted at the service level,
because all faults and maintenance can be handled at the node level—at least in
Summary | 311

theory. (In practice, if a bad configuration change is rolled out to all nodes, that will
still bring a distributed system to its knees.)
This chapter has been all about problems, and has given us a bleak outlook. In the
next chapter we will move on to solutions, and discuss some algorithms that have
been designed to cope with all the problems in distributed systems. 
References
[1] Mark Cavage: “ There’s Just No Getting Around It: You’re Building a Distributed
System,” ACM Queue , volume 11, number 4, pages 80-89, April 2013. doi:
10.1145/2466486.2482856
[2] Jay Kreps: “ Getting Real About Distributed System Reliability ,” blog.empathy‐
box.com, March 19, 2012.
[3] Sydney Padua: The Thrilling Adventures of Lovelace and Babbage: The (Mostly)
True Story of the First Computer . Particular Books, April 2015. ISBN:
978-0-141-98151-2
[4] Coda Hale: “ You Can’t Sacrifice Partition Tolerance ,” codahale.com, October 7,
2010.
[5] Jeff Hodges: “ Notes on Distributed Systems for Young Bloods ,” somethingsimi‐
lar.com, January 14, 2013.
[6] Antonio Regalado: “ Who Coined ‘Cloud Computing’? ,” technologyreview.com,
October 31, 2011.
[7] Luiz André Barroso, Jimmy Clidaras, and Urs Hölzle: “ The Datacenter as a Com‐
puter: An Introduction to the Design of Warehouse-Scale Machines, Second Edi‐
tion,” Synthesis Lectures on Computer Architecture , volume 8, number 3, Morgan &
Claypool Publishers, July 2013. doi:10.2200/S00516ED2V01Y201306CAC024, ISBN:
978-1-627-05010-4
[8] David Fiala, Frank Mueller, Christian Engelmann, et al.: “ Detection and Correc‐
tion of Silent Data Corruption for Large-Scale High-Performance Computing ,” at
International Conference for High Performance Computing, Networking, Storage and
Analysis (SC12), November 2012.
[9] Arjun Singh, Joon Ong, Amit Agarwal, et al.: “ Jupiter Rising: A Decade of Clos
Topologies and Centralized Control in Google’s Datacenter Network ,” at Annual
Conference of the ACM Special Interest Group on Data Communication (SIGCOMM),
August 2015. doi:10.1145/2785956.2787508
[10] Glenn K. Lockwood: “ Hadoop’s Uncomfortable Fit in HPC ,” glennklock‐
wood.blogspot.co.uk, May 16, 2014.
312 | Chapter 8: The Trouble with Distributed Systems

[11] John von Neumann: “ Probabilistic Logics and the Synthesis of Reliable Organ‐
isms from Unreliable Components ,” in Automata Studies (AM-34), edited by Claude
E. Shannon and John McCarthy, Princeton University Press, 1956. ISBN:
978-0-691-07916-5
[12] Richard W. Hamming: The Art of Doing Science and Engineering. Taylor & Fran‐
cis, 1997. ISBN: 978-9-056-99500-3
[13] Claude E. Shannon: “ A Mathematical Theory of Communication ,” The Bell Sys‐
tem Technical Journal, volume 27, number 3, pages 379–423 and 623–656, July 1948.
[14] Peter Bailis and Kyle Kingsbury: “ The Network Is Reliable ,” ACM Queue, vol‐
ume 12, number 7, pages 48-55, July 2014. doi:10.1145/2639988.2639988
[15] Joshua B. Leners, Trinabh Gupta, Marcos K. Aguilera, and Michael Walfish:
“ Taming Uncertainty in Distributed Systems with Help from the Network ,” at 10th
European Conference on Computer Systems  (EuroSys), April 2015. doi:
10.1145/2741948.2741976
[16] Phillipa Gill, Navendu Jain, and Nachiappan Nagappan: “ Understanding Net‐
work Failures in Data Centers: Measurement, Analysis, and Implications ,” at ACM
SIGCOMM Conference, August 2011. doi:10.1145/2018436.2018477
[17] Mark Imbriaco: “ Downtime Last Saturday,” github.com, December 26, 2012.
[18] Will Oremus: “ The Global Internet Is Being Attacked by Sharks, Google Con‐
firms,” slate.com, August 15, 2014.
[19] Marc A. Donges: “ Re: bnx2 cards Intermittantly Going Offline ,” Message to
Linux netdev mailing list, spinics.net, September 13, 2012.
[20] Kyle Kingsbury: “ Call Me Maybe: Elasticsearch,” aphyr.com, June 15, 2014.
[21] Salvatore Sanfilippo: “ A Few Arguments About Redis Sentinel Properties and
Fail Scenarios,” antirez.com, October 21, 2014.
[22] Bert Hubert: “ The Ultimate SO_LINGER Page, or: Why Is My TCP Not Relia‐
ble,” blog.netherlabs.nl, January 18, 2009.
[23] Nicolas Liochon: “ CAP: If All You Have Is a Timeout, Everything Looks Like a
Partition,” blog.thislongrun.com, May 25, 2015.
[24] Jerome H. Saltzer, David P. Reed, and David D. Clark: “ End-To-End Arguments
in System Design ,” ACM Transactions on Computer Systems , volume 2, number 4,
pages 277–288, November 1984. doi:10.1145/357401.357402
[25] Matthew P. Grosvenor, Malte Schwarzkopf, Ionel Gog, et al.: “ Queues Don’t
Matter When You Can JUMP Them! ,” at 12th USENIX Symposium on Networked
Systems Design and Implementation (NSDI), May 2015.
Summary | 313

[26] Guohui Wang and T. S. Eugene Ng: “ The Impact of Virtualization on Network
Performance of Amazon EC2 Data Center,” at 29th IEEE International Conference on
Computer Communications  (INFOCOM), March 2010. doi:10.1109/INFCOM.
2010.5461931
[27] Van Jacobson: “ Congestion Avoidance and Control ,” at ACM Symposium on
Communications Architectures and Protocols  (SIGCOMM), August 1988. doi:
10.1145/52324.52356
[28] Brandon Philips: “ etcd: Distributed Locking and Service Discovery ,” at Strange
Loop, September 2014.
[29] Steve Newman: “ A Systematic Look at EC2 I/O ,” blog.scalyr.com, October 16,
2012.
[30] Naohiro Hayashibara, Xavier Défago, Rami Yared, and Takuya Katayama: “ The
ϕ  Accrual Failure Detector ,” Japan Advanced Institute of Science and Technology,
School of Information Science, Technical Report IS-RR-2004-010, May 2004.
[31] Jeffrey Wang: “ Phi Accrual Failure Detector ,” ternarysearch.blogspot.co.uk,
August 11, 2013.
[32] Srinivasan Keshav: An Engineering Approach to Computer Networking: ATM
Networks, the Internet, and the Telephone Network . Addison-Wesley Professional,
May 1997. ISBN: 978-0-201-63442-6
[33] Cisco, “ Integrated Services Digital Network,” docwiki.cisco.com.
[34] Othmar Kyas: ATM Networks. International Thomson Publishing, 1995. ISBN:
978-1-850-32128-6
[35] “ InfiniBand FAQ,” Mellanox Technologies, December 22, 2014.
[36] Jose Renato Santos, Yoshio Turner, and G. (John) Janakiraman: “ End-to-End
Congestion Control for InfiniBand ,” at 22nd Annual Joint Conference of the IEEE
Computer and Communications Societies (INFOCOM), April 2003. Also published by
HP Laboratories Palo Alto, Tech Report HPL-2002-359. doi:10.1109/INFCOM.
2003.1208949
[37] Ulrich Windl, David Dalton, Marc Martinec, and Dale R. Worley: “ The NTP
FAQ and HOWTO,” ntp.org, November 2006.
[38] John Graham-Cumming: “ How and why the leap second affected Cloudflare
DNS,” blog.cloudflare.com, January 1, 2017.
[39] David Holmes: “ Inside the Hotspot VM: Clocks, Timers and Scheduling Events
– Part I – Windows ,” blogs.oracle.com, October 2, 2006.
[40] Steve Loughran: “ Time on Multi-Core, Multi-Socket Servers ,” stevelough‐
ran.blogspot.co.uk, September 17, 2015.
314 | Chapter 8: The Trouble with Distributed Systems

[41] James C. Corbett, Jeffrey Dean, Michael Epstein, et al.: “ Spanner: Google’s
Globally-Distributed Database ,” at 10th USENIX Symposium on Operating System
Design and Implementation (OSDI), October 2012.
[42] M. Caporaloni and R. Ambrosini: “ How Closely Can a Personal Computer
Clock Track the UTC Timescale Via the Internet? ,” European Journal of Physics, vol‐
ume 23, number 4, pages L17–L21, June 2012. doi:10.1088/0143-0807/23/4/103
[43] Nelson Minar: “ A Survey of the NTP Network ,” alumni.media.mit.edu, Decem‐
ber 1999.
[44] Viliam Holub: “ Synchronizing Clocks in a Cassandra Cluster Pt. 1 – The Prob‐
lem,” blog.logentries.com, March 14, 2014.
[45] Poul-Henning Kamp: “ The One-Second War (What Time Will You Die?) ,”
ACM Queue , volume 9, number 4, pages 44–48, April 2011. doi:
10.1145/1966989.1967009
[46] Nelson Minar: “ Leap Second Crashes Half the Internet ,” somebits.com, July 3,
2012.
[47] Christopher Pascoe: “ Time, Technology and Leaping Seconds ,” googleblog.blog‐
spot.co.uk, September 15, 2011.
[48] Mingxue Zhao and Jeff Barr: “ Look Before You Leap – The Coming Leap Second
and AWS,” aws.amazon.com, May 18, 2015.
[49] Darryl Veitch and Kanthaiah Vijayalayan: “ Network Timing and the 2015 Leap
Second,” at 17th International Conference on Passive and Active Measurement
(PAM), April 2016. doi:10.1007/978-3-319-30505-9_29
[50] “ Timekeeping in VMware Virtual Machines,” Information Guide, VMware, Inc.,
December 2011.
[51] “ MiFID II / MiFIR: Regulatory Technical and Implementing Standards – Annex
I (Draft) ,” European Securities and Markets Authority, Report ESMA/2015/1464,
September 2015.
[52] Luke Bigum: “ Solving MiFID II Clock Synchronisation With Minimum Spend
(Part 1),” lmax.com, November 27, 2015.
[53] Kyle Kingsbury: “ Call Me Maybe: Cassandra,” aphyr.com, September 24, 2013.
[54] John Daily: “ Clocks Are Bad, or, Welcome to the Wonderful World of Dis‐
tributed Systems,” basho.com, November 12, 2013.
[55] Kyle Kingsbury: “ The Trouble with Timestamps,” aphyr.com, October 12, 2013.
Summary | 315

[56] Leslie Lamport: “ Time, Clocks, and the Ordering of Events in a Distributed Sys‐
tem,” Communications of the ACM , volume 21, number 7, pages 558–565, July 1978.
doi:10.1145/359545.359563
[57] Sandeep Kulkarni, Murat Demirbas, Deepak Madeppa, et al.: “ Logical Physical
Clocks and Consistent Snapshots in Globally Distributed Databases,” State University
of New York at Buffalo, Computer Science and Engineering Technical Report
2014-04, May 2014.
[58] Justin Sheehy: “ There Is No Now: Problems With Simultaneity in Distributed
Systems,” ACM Queue , volume 13, number 3, pages 36–41, March 2015. doi:
10.1145/2733108
[59] Murat Demirbas: “ Spanner: Google’s Globally-Distributed Database ,” muratbuf‐
falo.blogspot.co.uk, July 4, 2013.
[60] Dahlia Malkhi and Jean-Philippe Martin: “ Spanner’s Concurrency Control ,”
ACM SIGACT News , volume 44, number 3, pages 73–77, September 2013. doi:
10.1145/2527748.2527767
[61] Manuel Bravo, Nuno Diegues, Jingna Zeng, et al.: “ On the Use of Clocks to
Enforce Consistency in the Cloud,” IEEE Data Engineering Bulletin, volume 38, num‐
ber 1, pages 18–31, March 2015.
[62] Spencer Kimball: “ Living Without Atomic Clocks,” cockroachlabs.com, February
17, 2016.
[63] Cary G. Gray and David R. Cheriton: “ Leases: An Efficient Fault-Tolerant Mech‐
anism for Distributed File Cache Consistency ,” at 12th ACM Symposium on Operat‐
ing Systems Principles (SOSP), December 1989. doi:10.1145/74850.74870
[64] Todd Lipcon: “ Avoiding Full GCs in Apache HBase with MemStore-Local Allo‐
cation Buffers: Part 1,” blog.cloudera.com, February 24, 2011.
[65] Martin Thompson: “ Java Garbage Collection Distilled ,” mechanical-
sympathy.blogspot.co.uk, July 16, 2013.
[66] Alexey Ragozin: “ How to Tame Java GC Pauses? Surviving 16GiB Heap and
Greater,” java.dzone.com, June 28, 2011.
[67] Christopher Clark, Keir Fraser, Steven Hand, et al.: “ Live Migration of Virtual
Machines,” at 2nd USENIX Symposium on Symposium on Networked Systems Design
& Implementation (NSDI), May 2005.
[68] Mike Shaver: “ fsyncers and Curveballs,” shaver.off.net, May 25, 2008.
[69] Zhenyun Zhuang and Cuong Tran: “ Eliminating Large JVM GC Pauses Caused
by Background IO Traffic,” engineering.linkedin.com, February 10, 2016.
316 | Chapter 8: The Trouble with Distributed Systems

[70] David Terei and Amit Levy: “ Blade: A Data Center Garbage Collector ,” arXiv:
1504.02578, April 13, 2015.
[71] Martin Maas, Tim Harris, Krste Asanović, and John Kubiatowicz: “ Trash Day:
Coordinating Garbage Collection in Distributed Systems,” at 15th USENIX Workshop
on Hot Topics in Operating Systems (HotOS), May 2015.
[72] “ Predictable Low Latency ,” Cinnober Financial Technology AB, cinnober.com,
November 24, 2013.
[73] Martin Fowler: “ The LMAX Architecture,” martinfowler.com, July 12, 2011.
[74] Flavio P. Junqueira and Benjamin Reed: ZooKeeper: Distributed Process Coordi‐
nation. O’Reilly Media, 2013. ISBN: 978-1-449-36130-3
[75] Enis Söztutar: “ HBase and HDFS: Understanding Filesystem Usage in HBase,” at
HBaseCon, June 2013.
[76] Caitie McCaffrey: “ Clients Are Jerks: AKA How Halo 4 DoSed the Services at
Launch & How We Survived,” caitiem.com, June 23, 2015.
[77] Leslie Lamport, Robert Shostak, and Marshall Pease: “ The Byzantine Generals
Problem,” ACM Transactions on Programming Languages and Systems  (TOPLAS),
volume 4, number 3, pages 382–401, July 1982. doi:10.1145/357172.357176
[78] Jim N. Gray: “ Notes on Data Base Operating Systems,” in Operating Systems: An
Advanced Course, Lecture Notes in Computer Science, volume 60, edited by R. Bayer,
R. M. Graham, and G. Seegmüller, pages 393–481, Springer-Verlag, 1978. ISBN:
978-3-540-08755-7
[79] Brian Palmer: “ How Complicated Was the Byzantine Empire? ,” slate.com, Octo‐
ber 20, 2011.
[80] Leslie Lamport: “ My Writings,” research.microsoft.com, December 16, 2014. This
page can be found by searching the web for the 23-character string obtained by
removing the hyphens from the string allla-mport-spubso-ntheweb.
[81] John Rushby: “ Bus Architectures for Safety-Critical Embedded Systems ,” at 1st
International Workshop on Embedded Software (EMSOFT), October 2001.
[82] Jake Edge: “ ELC: SpaceX Lessons Learned,” lwn.net, March 6, 2013.
[83] Andrew Miller and Joseph J. LaViola, Jr.: “ Anonymous Byzantine Consensus
from Moderately-Hard Puzzles: A Model for Bitcoin ,” University of Central Florida,
Technical Report CS-TR-14-01, April 2014.
[84] James Mickens: “ The Saddest Moment,” USENIX ;login: logout, May 2013.
[85] Evan Gilman: “ The Discovery of Apache ZooKeeper’s Poison Packet ,” pagerd‐
uty.com, May 7, 2015.
Summary | 317

[86] Jonathan Stone and Craig Partridge: “ When the CRC and TCP Checksum Disa‐
gree,” at ACM Conference on Applications, Technologies, Architectures, and Protocols
for Computer Communication  (SIGCOMM), August 2000. doi:
10.1145/347059.347561
[87] Evan Jones: “ How Both TCP and Ethernet Checksums Fail ,” evanjones.ca, Octo‐
ber 5, 2015.
[88] Cynthia Dwork, Nancy Lynch, and Larry Stockmeyer: “ Consensus in the Pres‐
ence of Partial Synchrony ,” Journal of the ACM , volume 35, number 2, pages 288–
323, April 1988. doi:10.1145/42282.42283
[89] Peter Bailis and Ali Ghodsi: “ Eventual Consistency Today: Limitations, Exten‐
sions, and Beyond ,” ACM Queue , volume 11, number 3, pages 55-63, March 2013.
doi:10.1145/2460276.2462076
[90] Bowen Alpern and Fred B. Schneider: “ Defining Liveness,” Information Process‐
ing Letters , volume 21, number 4, pages 181–185, October 1985. doi:
10.1016/0020-0190(85)90056-0
[91] Flavio P. Junqueira: “ Dude, Where’s My Metadata? ,” fpj.me, May 28, 2015.
[92] Scott Sanders: “ January 28th Incident Report,” github.com, February 3, 2016.
[93] Jay Kreps: “ A Few Notes on Kafka and Jepsen ,” blog.empathybox.com, Septem‐
ber 25, 2013.
[94] Thanh Do, Mingzhe Hao, Tanakorn Leesatapornwongsa, et al.: “ Limplock:
Understanding the Impact of Limpware on Scale-out Cloud Systems ,” at 4th ACM
Symposium on Cloud Computing  (SoCC), October 2013. doi:
10.1145/2523616.2523627
[95] Frank McSherry, Michael Isard, and Derek G. Murray: “ Scalability! But at What
COST?,” at 15th USENIX Workshop on Hot Topics in Operating Systems  (HotOS),
May 2015.
318 | Chapter 8: The Trouble with Distributed Systems

CHAPTER 9
Consistency and Consensus
Is it better to be alive and wrong or right and dead?
—Jay Kreps, A Few Notes on Kafka and Jepsen (2013)
Lots of things can go wrong in distributed systems, as discussed in Chapter 8 . The
simplest way of handling such faults is to simply let the entire service fail, and show
the user an error message. If that solution is unacceptable, we need to find ways of
tolerating faults—that is, of keeping the service functioning correctly, even if some
internal component is faulty.
In this chapter, we will talk about some examples of algorithms and protocols for
building fault-tolerant distributed systems. We will assume that all the problems
from Chapter 8  can occur: packets can be lost, reordered, duplicated, or arbitrarily
delayed in the network; clocks are approximate at best; and nodes can pause (e.g., due
to garbage collection) or crash at any time.
The best way of building fault-tolerant systems is to find some general-purpose
abstractions with useful guarantees, implement them once, and then let applications
rely on those guarantees. This is the same approach as we used with transactions in
Chapter 7 : by using a transaction, the application can pretend that there are no
crashes (atomicity), that nobody else is concurrently accessing the database (isola‐
tion), and that storage devices are perfectly reliable (durability). Even though crashes,
race conditions, and disk failures do occur, the transaction abstraction hides those
problems so that the application doesn’t need to worry about them.
We will now continue along the same lines, and seek abstractions that can allow an
application to ignore some of the problems with distributed systems. For example,
one of the most important abstractions for distributed systems is consensus: that is,
getting all of the nodes to agree on something. As we shall see in this chapter, reliably
321

reaching consensus in spite of network faults and process failures is a surprisingly
tricky problem.
Once you have an implementation of consensus, applications can use it for various
purposes. For example, say you have a database with single-leader replication. If the
leader dies and you need to fail over to another node, the remaining database nodes
can use consensus to elect a new leader. As discussed in “Handling Node Outages” on
page 156, it’s important that there is only one leader, and that all nodes agree who the
leader is. If two nodes both believe that they are the leader, that situation is called split
brain, and it often leads to data loss. Correct implementations of consensus help
avoid such problems.
Later in this chapter, in “Distributed Transactions and Consensus” on page 352, we
will look into algorithms to solve consensus and related problems. But first we first
need to explore the range of guarantees and abstractions that can be provided in a
distributed system.
We need to understand the scope of what can and cannot be done: in some situa‐
tions, it’s possible for the system to tolerate faults and continue working; in other sit‐
uations, that is not possible. The limits of what is and isn’t possible have been
explored in depth, both in theoretical proofs and in practical implementations. We
will get an overview of those fundamental limits in this chapter.
Researchers in the field of distributed systems have been studying these topics for
decades, so there is a lot of material—we’ll only be able to scratch the surface. In this
book we don’t have space to go into details of the formal models and proofs, so we
will stick with informal intuitions. The literature references offer plenty of additional
depth if you’re interested.
Consistency Guarantees
In “Problems with Replication Lag” on page 161  we looked at some timing issues that
occur in a replicated database. If you look at two database nodes at the same moment
in time, you’re likely to see different data on the two nodes, because write requests
arrive on different nodes at different times. These inconsistencies occur no matter
what replication method the database uses (single-leader, multi-leader, or leaderless
replication).
Most replicated databases provide at least eventual consistency, which means that if
you stop writing to the database and wait for some unspecified length of time, then
eventually all read requests will return the same value [ 1]. In other words, the incon‐
sistency is temporary, and it eventually resolves itself (assuming that any faults in the
network are also eventually repaired). A better name for eventual consistency may be
convergence, as we expect all replicas to eventually converge to the same value [2].
322 | Chapter 9: Consistency and Consensus

However, this is a very weak guarantee—it doesn’t say anything about when the repli‐
cas will converge. Until the time of convergence, reads could return anything or
nothing [ 1]. For example, if you write a value and then immediately read it again,
there is no guarantee that you will see the value you just wrote, because the read may
be routed to a different replica (see “Reading Your Own Writes” on page 162 ).
Eventual consistency is hard for application developers because it is so different from
the behavior of variables in a normal single-threaded program. If you assign a value
to a variable and then read it shortly afterward, you don’t expect to read back the old
value, or for the read to fail. A database looks superficially like a variable that you can
read and write, but in fact it has much more complicated semantics [3].
When working with a database that provides only weak guarantees, you need to be
constantly aware of its limitations and not accidentally assume too much. Bugs are
often subtle and hard to find by testing, because the application may work well most
of the time. The edge cases of eventual consistency only become apparent when there
is a fault in the system (e.g., a network interruption) or at high concurrency.
In this chapter we will explore stronger consistency models that data systems may
choose to provide. They don’t come for free: systems with stronger guarantees may
have worse performance or be less fault-tolerant than systems with weaker guaran‐
tees. Nevertheless, stronger guarantees can be appealing because they are easier to use
correctly. Once you have seen a few different consistency models, you’ll be in a better
position to decide which one best fits your needs.
There is some similarity between distributed consistency models and the hierarchy of
transaction isolation levels we discussed previously [ 4, 5] (see “Weak Isolation Lev‐
els”  on page 233). But while there is some overlap, they are mostly independent con‐
cerns: transaction isolation is primarily about avoiding race conditions due to
concurrently executing transactions, whereas distributed consistency is mostly about
coordinating the state of replicas in the face of delays and faults.
This chapter covers a broad range of topics, but as we shall see, these areas are in fact
deeply linked:
• We will start by looking at one of the strongest consistency models in common
use, linearizability, and examine its pros and cons.
• We’ll then examine the issue of ordering events in a distributed system ( “Order‐
ing Guarantees” on page 339 ), particularly around causality and total ordering.
• In the third section ( “Distributed Transactions and Consensus” on page 352) we
will explore how to atomically commit a distributed transaction, which will
finally lead us toward solutions for the consensus problem.
Consistency Guarantees | 323

Linearizability
In an eventually consistent database, if you ask two different replicas the same ques‐
tion at the same time, you may get two different answers. That’s confusing. Wouldn’t
it be a lot simpler if the database could give the illusion that there is only one replica
(i.e., only one copy of the data)? Then every client would have the same view of the
data, and you wouldn’t have to worry about replication lag.
This is the idea behind linearizability [6] (also known as atomic consistency [7], strong
consistency, immediate consistency, or external consistency [8]). The exact definition
of linearizability is quite subtle, and we will explore it in the rest of this section. But
the basic idea is to make a system appear as if there were only one copy of the data,
and all operations on it are atomic. With this guarantee, even though there may be
multiple replicas in reality, the application does not need to worry about them.
In a linearizable system, as soon as one client successfully completes a write, all cli‐
ents reading from the database must be able to see the value just written. Maintaining
the illusion of a single copy of the data means guaranteeing that the value read is the
most recent, up-to-date value, and doesn’t come from a stale cache or replica. In
other words, linearizability is a recency guarantee. To clarify this idea, let’s look at an
example of a system that is not linearizable.
Figure 9-1. This system is not linearizable, causing football fans to be confused.
324 | Chapter 9: Consistency and Consensus

Figure 9-1 shows an example of a nonlinearizable sports website [ 9]. Alice and Bob
are sitting in the same room, both checking their phones to see the outcome of the
2014 FIFA World Cup final. Just after the final score is announced, Alice refreshes
the page, sees the winner announced, and excitedly tells Bob about it. Bob incredu‐
lously hits reload on his own phone, but his request goes to a database replica that is
lagging, and so his phone shows that the game is still ongoing.
If Alice and Bob had hit reload at the same time, it would have been less surprising if
they had gotten two different query results, because they wouldn’t know at exactly
what time their respective requests were processed by the server. However, Bob
knows that he hit the reload button (initiated his query) after he heard Alice exclaim
the final score, and therefore he expects his query result to be at least as recent as
Alice’s. The fact that his query returned a stale result is a violation of linearizability.
What Makes a System Linearizable?
The basic idea behind linearizability is simple: to make a system appear as if there is
only a single copy of the data. However, nailing down precisely what that means
actually requires some care. In order to understand linearizability better, let’s look at
some more examples.
Figure 9-2 shows three clients concurrently reading and writing the same key x in a
linearizable database. In the distributed systems literature, x is called a register—in
practice, it could be one key in a key-value store, one row in a relational database, or
one document in a document database, for example.
Figure 9-2. If a read request is concurrent with a write request, it may return either the
old or the new value.
For simplicity, Figure 9-2 shows only the requests from the clients’ point of view, not
the internals of the database. Each bar is a request made by a client, where the start of
a bar is the time when the request was sent, and the end of a bar is when the response
was received by the client. Due to variable network delays, a client doesn’t know
Linearizability | 325

i. A subtle detail of this diagram is that it assumes the existence of a global clock, represented by the horizon‐
tal axis. Even though real systems typically don’t have accurate clocks (see “Unreliable Clocks” on page 287 ),
this assumption is okay: for the purposes of analyzing a distributed algorithm, we may pretend that an accu‐
rate global clock exists, as long as the algorithm doesn’t have access to it [ 47]. Instead, the algorithm can only
see a mangled approximation of real time, as produced by a quartz oscillator and NTP.
ii. A register in which reads may return either the old or the new value if they are concurrent with a write is
known as a regular register [7, 25].
exactly when the database processed its request—it only knows that it must have hap‐
pened sometime between the client sending the request and receiving the response.i
In this example, the register has two types of operations:
• read(x) ⇒ v means the client requested to read the value of register x, and the
database returned the value v.
• write(x, v) ⇒ r means the client requested to set the register x to value v, and the
database returned response r (which could be ok or error).
In Figure 9-2, the value of x is initially 0, and client C performs a write request to set
it to 1. While this is happening, clients A and B are repeatedly polling the database to
read the latest value. What are the possible responses that A and B might get for their
read requests?
• The first read operation by client A completes before the write begins, so it must
definitely return the old value 0.
• The last read by client A begins after the write has completed, so it must defi‐
nitely return the new value 1 if the database is linearizable: we know that the
write must have been processed sometime between the start and end of the write
operation, and the read must have been processed sometime between the start
and end of the read operation. If the read started after the write ended, then the
read must have been processed after the write, and therefore it must see the new
value that was written.
• Any read operations that overlap in time with the write operation might return
either 0 or 1, because we don’t know whether or not the write has taken effect at
the time when the read operation is processed. These operations are concurrent
with the write.
However, that is not yet sufficient to fully describe linearizability: if reads that are
concurrent with a write can return either the old or the new value, then readers could
see a value flip back and forth between the old and the new value several times while
a write is going on. That is not what we expect of a system that emulates a “single
copy of the data.” ii
326 | Chapter 9: Consistency and Consensus

To make the system linearizable, we need to add another constraint, illustrated in
Figure 9-3.
Figure 9-3. After any one read has returned the new value, all following reads (on the
same or other clients) must also return the new value.
In a linearizable system we imagine that there must be some point in time (between
the start and end of the write operation) at which the value of x atomically flips from
0 to 1. Thus, if one client’s read returns the new value 1, all subsequent reads must
also return the new value, even if the write operation has not yet completed.
This timing dependency is illustrated with an arrow in Figure 9-3. Client A is the first
to read the new value, 1. Just after A’s read returns, B begins a new read. Since B’s
read occurs strictly after A’s read, it must also return 1, even though the write by C is
still ongoing. (It’s the same situation as with Alice and Bob in Figure 9-1: after Alice
has read the new value, Bob also expects to read the new value.)
We can further refine this timing diagram to visualize each operation taking effect
atomically at some point in time. A more complex example is shown in Figure 9-4
[10].
In Figure 9-4 we add a third type of operation besides read and write:
• cas(x, vold, vnew) ⇒ r means the client requested an atomic compare-and-set oper‐
ation (see “Compare-and-set”  on page 245). If the current value of the register x
equals vold, it should be atomically set to vnew. If x ≠ vold then the operation should
leave the register unchanged and return an error. r is the database’s response ( ok
or error).
Each operation in Figure 9-4 is marked with a vertical line (inside the bar for each
operation) at the time when we think the operation was executed. Those markers are
joined up in a sequential order, and the result must be a valid sequence of reads and
writes for a register (every read must return the value set by the most recent write).
The requirement of linearizability is that the lines joining up the operation markers
always move forward in time (from left to right), never backward. This requirement
Linearizability | 327

ensures the recency guarantee we discussed earlier: once a new value has been written
or read, all subsequent reads see the value that was written, until it is overwritten
again.
Figure 9-4. Visualizing the points in time at which the reads and writes appear to have
taken effect. The final read by B is not linearizable.
There are a few interesting details to point out in Figure 9-4:
• First client B sent a request to read x, then client D sent a request to set x to 0,
and then client A sent a request to set x to 1. Nevertheless, the value returned to
B’s read is 1 (the value written by A). This is okay: it means that the database first
processed D’s write, then A’s write, and finally B’s read. Although this is not the
order in which the requests were sent, it’s an acceptable order, because the three
requests are concurrent. Perhaps B’s read request was slightly delayed in the net‐
work, so it only reached the database after the two writes.
• Client B’s read returned 1 before client A received its response from the database,
saying that the write of the value 1 was successful. This is also okay: it doesn’t
mean the value was read before it was written, it just means the ok response from
the database to client A was slightly delayed in the network.
• This model doesn’t assume any transaction isolation: another client may change
a value at any time. For example, C first reads 1 and then reads 2, because the
value was changed by B between the two reads. An atomic compare-and-set ( cas)
operation can be used to check the value hasn’t been concurrently changed by
another client: B and C’s cas requests succeed, but D’s cas request fails (by the
time the database processes it, the value of x is no longer 0).
• The final read by client B (in a shaded bar) is not linearizable. The operation is
concurrent with C’s cas write, which updates x from 2 to 4. In the absence of
328 | Chapter 9: Consistency and Consensus

other requests, it would be okay for B’s read to return 2. However, client A has
already read the new value 4 before B’s read started, so B is not allowed to read
an older value than A. Again, it’s the same situation as with Alice and Bob in
Figure 9-1.
That is the intuition behind linearizability; the formal definition [ 6] describes it more
precisely. It is possible (though computationally expensive) to test whether a system’s
behavior is linearizable by recording the timings of all requests and responses, and
checking whether they can be arranged into a valid sequential order [11]. 
Linearizability Versus Serializability
Linearizability is easily confused with serializability (see “Serializability” on page 251 ),
as both words seem to mean something like “can be arranged in a sequential order.”
However, they are two quite different guarantees, and it is important to distinguish
between them:
Serializability
Serializability is an isolation property of transactions, where every transaction
may read and write multiple objects (rows, documents, records)—see “Single-
Object and Multi-Object Operations” on page 228. It guarantees that transac‐
tions behave the same as if they had executed in some serial order (each
transaction running to completion before the next transaction starts). It is okay
for that serial order to be different from the order in which transactions were
actually run [12].
Linearizability
Linearizability is a recency guarantee on reads and writes of a register (an indi‐
vidual object). It doesn’t group operations together into transactions, so it does
not prevent problems such as write skew (see “Write Skew and Phantoms” on
page 246), unless you take additional measures such as materializing conflicts
(see “Materializing conflicts” on page 251 ).
A database may provide both serializability and linearizability, and this combination
is known as strict serializability or strong one-copy serializability (strong-1SR) [4, 13].
Implementations of serializability based on two-phase locking (see “Two-Phase Lock‐
ing (2PL)” on page 257) or actual serial execution (see “Actual Serial Execution”  on
page 252) are typically linearizable.
However, serializable snapshot isolation (see “Serializable Snapshot Isolation (SSI)”
on page 261) is not linearizable: by design, it makes reads from a consistent snapshot,
to avoid lock contention between readers and writers. The whole point of a consistent
snapshot is that it does not include writes that are more recent than the snapshot, and
thus reads from the snapshot are not linearizable.
Linearizability | 329

iii. Strictly speaking, ZooKeeper and etcd provide linearizable writes, but reads may be stale, since by default
they can be served by any one of the replicas. You can optionally request a linearizable read: etcd calls this a
quorum read [16], and in ZooKeeper you need to call sync() before the read [15]; see “Implementing linear‐
izable storage using total order broadcast” on page 350 .
Relying on Linearizability
In what circumstances is linearizability useful? Viewing the final score of a sporting
match is perhaps a frivolous example: a result that is outdated by a few seconds is
unlikely to cause any real harm in this situation. However, there a few areas in which
linearizability is an important requirement for making a system work correctly.
Locking and leader election
A system that uses single-leader replication needs to ensure that there is indeed only
one leader, not several (split brain). One way of electing a leader is to use a lock: every
node that starts up tries to acquire the lock, and the one that succeeds becomes the
leader [14]. No matter how this lock is implemented, it must be linearizable: all nodes
must agree which node owns the lock; otherwise it is useless.
Coordination services like Apache ZooKeeper [ 15] and etcd [ 16] are often used to
implement distributed locks and leader election. They use consensus algorithms to
implement linearizable operations in a fault-tolerant way (we discuss such algorithms
later in this chapter, in “Fault-Tolerant Consensus” on page 364).iii There are still
many subtle details to implementing locks and leader election correctly (see for
example the fencing issue in “The leader and the lock” on page 301 ), and libraries like
Apache Curator [ 17] help by providing higher-level recipes on top of ZooKeeper.
However, a linearizable storage service is the basic foundation for these coordination
tasks.
Distributed locking is also used at a much more granular level in some distributed
databases, such as Oracle Real Application Clusters (RAC) [ 18]. RAC uses a lock per
disk page, with multiple nodes sharing access to the same disk storage system. Since
these linearizable locks are on the critical path of transaction execution, RAC deploy‐
ments usually have a dedicated cluster interconnect network for communication
between database nodes.
Constraints and uniqueness guarantees
Uniqueness constraints are common in databases: for example, a username or email
address must uniquely identify one user, and in a file storage service there cannot be
two files with the same path and filename. If you want to enforce this constraint as
the data is written (such that if two people try to concurrently create a user or a file
with the same name, one of them will be returned an error), you need linearizability.
330 | Chapter 9: Consistency and Consensus

This situation is actually similar to a lock: when a user registers for your service, you
can think of them acquiring a “lock” on their chosen username. The operation is also
very similar to an atomic compare-and-set, setting the username to the ID of the user
who claimed it, provided that the username is not already taken.
Similar issues arise if you want to ensure that a bank account balance never goes neg‐
ative, or that you don’t sell more items than you have in stock in the warehouse, or
that two people don’t concurrently book the same seat on a flight or in a theater.
These constraints all require there to be a single up-to-date value (the account bal‐
ance, the stock level, the seat occupancy) that all nodes agree on.
In real applications, it is sometimes acceptable to treat such constraints loosely (for
example, if a flight is overbooked, you can move customers to a different flight and
offer them compensation for the inconvenience). In such cases, linearizability may
not be needed, and we will discuss such loosely interpreted constraints in “Timeliness
and Integrity” on page 524 .
However, a hard uniqueness constraint, such as the one you typically find in rela‐
tional databases, requires linearizability. Other kinds of constraints, such as foreign
key or attribute constraints, can be implemented without requiring linearizability
[19].
Cross-channel timing dependencies
Notice a detail in Figure 9-1: if Alice hadn’t exclaimed the score, Bob wouldn’t have
known that the result of his query was stale. He would have just refreshed the page
again a few seconds later, and eventually seen the final score. The linearizability viola‐
tion was only noticed because there was an additional communication channel in the
system (Alice’s voice to Bob’s ears).
Similar situations can arise in computer systems. For example, say you have a website
where users can upload a photo, and a background process resizes the photos to
lower resolution for faster download (thumbnails). The architecture and dataflow of
this system is illustrated in Figure 9-5.
The image resizer needs to be explicitly instructed to perform a resizing job, and this
instruction is sent from the web server to the resizer via a message queue (see Chap‐
ter 11). The web server doesn’t place the entire photo on the queue, since most mes‐
sage brokers are designed for small messages, and a photo may be several megabytes
in size. Instead, the photo is first written to a file storage service, and once the write is
complete, the instruction to the resizer is placed on the queue.
Linearizability | 331

Figure 9-5. The web server and image resizer communicate both through file storage
and a message queue, opening the potential for race conditions.
If the file storage service is linearizable, then this system should work fine. If it is not
linearizable, there is the risk of a race condition: the message queue (steps 3 and 4 in
Figure 9-5) might be faster than the internal replication inside the storage service. In
this case, when the resizer fetches the image (step 5), it might see an old version of the
image, or nothing at all. If it processes an old version of the image, the full-size and
resized images in the file storage become permanently inconsistent.
This problem arises because there are two different communication channels
between the web server and the resizer: the file storage and the message queue.
Without the recency guarantee of linearizability, race conditions between these two
channels are possible. This situation is analogous to Figure 9-1, where there was also
a race condition between two communication channels: the database replication and
the real-life audio channel between Alice’s mouth and Bob’s ears.
Linearizability is not the only way of avoiding this race condition, but it’s the simplest
to understand. If you control the additional communication channel (like in the case
of the message queue, but not in the case of Alice and Bob), you can use alternative
approaches similar to what we discussed in “Reading Your Own Writes” on page 162 ,
at the cost of additional complexity. 
Implementing Linearizable Systems
Now that we’ve looked at a few examples in which linearizability is useful, let’s think
about how we might implement a system that offers linearizable semantics.
Since linearizability essentially means “behave as though there is only a single copy of
the data, and all operations on it are atomic,” the simplest answer would be to really
only use a single copy of the data. However, that approach would not be able to toler‐
ate faults: if the node holding that one copy failed, the data would be lost, or at least
inaccessible until the node was brought up again.
332 | Chapter 9: Consistency and Consensus

iv. Partitioning (sharding) a single-leader database, so that there is a separate leader per partition, does not
affect linearizability, since it is only a single-object guarantee. Cross-partition transactions are a different mat‐
ter (see “Distributed Transactions and Consensus” on page 352 ).
The most common approach to making a system fault-tolerant is to use replication.
Let’s revisit the replication methods from Chapter 5, and compare whether they can
be made linearizable:
Single-leader replication (potentially linearizable)
In a system with single-leader replication (see “Leaders and Followers” on page
152), the leader has the primary copy of the data that is used for writes, and the
followers maintain backup copies of the data on other nodes. If you make reads
from the leader, or from synchronously updated followers, they have the poten‐
tial to be linearizable.iv However, not every single-leader database is actually line‐
arizable, either by design (e.g., because it uses snapshot isolation) or due to
concurrency bugs [10].
Using the leader for reads relies on the assumption that you know for sure who
the leader is. As discussed in “The Truth Is Defined by the Majority” on page
300, it is quite possible for a node to think that it is the leader, when in fact it is
not—and if the delusional leader continues to serve requests, it is likely to violate
linearizability [20]. With asynchronous replication, failover may even lose com‐
mitted writes (see “Handling Node Outages” on page 156), which violates both
durability and linearizability.
Consensus algorithms (linearizable)
Some consensus algorithms, which we will discuss later in this chapter, bear a
resemblance to single-leader replication. However, consensus protocols contain
measures to prevent split brain and stale replicas. Thanks to these details, con‐
sensus algorithms can implement linearizable storage safely. This is how Zoo‐
Keeper [21] and etcd [22] work, for example.
Multi-leader replication (not linearizable)
Systems with multi-leader replication are generally not linearizable, because they
concurrently process writes on multiple nodes and asynchronously replicate
them to other nodes. For this reason, they can produce conflicting writes that
require resolution (see “Handling Write Conflicts” on page 171). Such conflicts
are an artifact of the lack of a single copy of the data.
Leaderless replication (probably not linearizable)
For systems with leaderless replication (Dynamo-style; see “Leaderless Replica‐
tion”  on page 177), people sometimes claim that you can obtain “strong consis‐
tency” by requiring quorum reads and writes ( w + r > n). Depending on the exact
Linearizability | 333

configuration of the quorums, and depending on how you define strong consis‐
tency, this is not quite true.
“Last write wins” conflict resolution methods based on time-of-day clocks (e.g.,
in Cassandra; see “Relying on Synchronized Clocks” on page 291 ) are almost cer‐
tainly nonlinearizable, because clock timestamps cannot be guaranteed to be
consistent with actual event ordering due to clock skew. Sloppy quorums
(“Sloppy Quorums and Hinted Handoff” on page 183) also ruin any chance of
linearizability. Even with strict quorums, nonlinearizable behavior is possible, as
demonstrated in the next section.
Linearizability and quorums
Intuitively, it seems as though strict quorum reads and writes should be linearizable
in a Dynamo-style model. However, when we have variable network delays, it is pos‐
sible to have race conditions, as demonstrated in Figure 9-6.
Figure 9-6. A nonlinearizable execution, despite using a strict quorum.
In Figure 9-6, the initial value of x is 0, and a writer client is updating x to 1 by send‐
ing the write to all three replicas ( n = 3, w = 3). Concurrently, client A reads from a
quorum of two nodes (r = 2) and sees the new value 1 on one of the nodes. Also con‐
currently with the write, client B reads from a different quorum of two nodes, and
gets back the old value 0 from both.
The quorum condition is met ( w + r > n), but this execution is nevertheless not line‐
arizable: B’s request begins after A’s request completes, but B returns the old value
334 | Chapter 9: Consistency and Consensus

while A returns the new value. (It’s once again the Alice and Bob situation from
Figure 9-1.)
Interestingly, it is possible to make Dynamo-style quorums linearizable at the cost of
reduced performance: a reader must perform read repair (see “Read repair and anti-
entropy”  on page 178) synchronously, before returning results to the application
[23], and a writer must read the latest state of a quorum of nodes before sending its
writes [24, 25]. However, Riak does not perform synchronous read repair due to the
performance penalty [ 26]. Cassandra does wait for read repair to complete on quo‐
rum reads [ 27], but it loses linearizability if there are multiple concurrent writes to
the same key, due to its use of last-write-wins conflict resolution.
Moreover, only linearizable read and write operations can be implemented in this
way; a linearizable compare-and-set operation cannot, because it requires a consen‐
sus algorithm [28].
In summary, it is safest to assume that a leaderless system with Dynamo-style replica‐
tion does not provide linearizability. 
The Cost of Linearizability
As some replication methods can provide linearizability and others cannot, it is inter‐
esting to explore the pros and cons of linearizability in more depth.
We already discussed some use cases for different replication methods in Chapter 5;
for example, we saw that multi-leader replication is often a good choice for multi-
datacenter replication (see “Multi-datacenter operation” on page 168 ). An example of
such a deployment is illustrated in Figure 9-7.
Figure 9-7. A network interruption forcing a choice between linearizability and availa‐
bility.
Linearizability | 335

v. These two choices are sometimes known as CP (consistent but not available under network partitions) and
AP (available but not consistent under network partitions), respectively. However, this classification scheme
has several flaws [9], so it is best avoided.
Consider what happens if there is a network interruption between the two datacen‐
ters. Let’s assume that the network within each datacenter is working, and clients can
reach the datacenters, but the datacenters cannot connect to each other.
With a multi-leader database, each datacenter can continue operating normally: since
writes from one datacenter are asynchronously replicated to the other, the writes are
simply queued up and exchanged when network connectivity is restored.
On the other hand, if single-leader replication is used, then the leader must be in one
of the datacenters. Any writes and any linearizable reads must be sent to the leader—
thus, for any clients connected to a follower datacenter, those read and write requests
must be sent synchronously over the network to the leader datacenter.
If the network between datacenters is interrupted in a single-leader setup, clients con‐
nected to follower datacenters cannot contact the leader, so they cannot make any
writes to the database, nor any linearizable reads. They can still make reads from the
follower, but they might be stale (nonlinearizable). If the application requires linear‐
izable reads and writes, the network interruption causes the application to become
unavailable in the datacenters that cannot contact the leader.
If clients can connect directly to the leader datacenter, this is not a problem, since the
application continues to work normally there. But clients that can only reach a fol‐
lower datacenter will experience an outage until the network link is repaired.
The CAP theorem
This issue is not just a consequence of single-leader and multi-leader replication: any
linearizable database has this problem, no matter how it is implemented. The issue
also isn’t specific to multi-datacenter deployments, but can occur on any unreliable
network, even within one datacenter. The trade-off is as follows:v
• If your application requires linearizability, and some replicas are disconnected
from the other replicas due to a network problem, then some replicas cannot
process requests while they are disconnected: they must either wait until the net‐
work problem is fixed, or return an error (either way, they become unavailable).
• If your application does not require linearizability, then it can be written in a way
that each replica can process requests independently, even if it is disconnected
from other replicas (e.g., multi-leader). In this case, the application can remain
available in the face of a network problem, but its behavior is not linearizable.
336 | Chapter 9: Consistency and Consensus

vi. As discussed in “Network Faults in Practice” on page 279 , this book uses partitioning to refer to deliber‐
ately breaking down a large dataset into smaller ones (sharding; see Chapter 6). By contrast, a network parti‐
tion is a particular type of network fault, which we normally don’t consider separately from other kinds of
faults. However, since it’s the P in CAP, we can’t avoid the confusion in this case.
Thus, applications that don’t require linearizability can be more tolerant of network
problems. This insight is popularly known as the CAP theorem  [29, 30, 31, 32],
named by Eric Brewer in 2000, although the trade-off has been known to designers of
distributed databases since the 1970s [33, 34, 35, 36].
CAP was originally proposed as a rule of thumb, without precise definitions, with the
goal of starting a discussion about trade-offs in databases. At the time, many dis‐
tributed databases focused on providing linearizable semantics on a cluster of
machines with shared storage [ 18], and CAP encouraged database engineers to
explore a wider design space of distributed shared-nothing systems, which were more
suitable for implementing large-scale web services [ 37]. CAP deserves credit for this
culture shift—witness the explosion of new database technologies since the
mid-2000s (known as NoSQL).
The Unhelpful CAP Theorem
CAP is sometimes presented as Consistency, Availability, Partition tolerance: pick 2
out of 3. Unfortunately, putting it this way is misleading [ 32] because network parti‐
tions are a kind of fault, so they aren’t something about which you have a choice: they
will happen whether you like it or not [38].
At times when the network is working correctly, a system can provide both consis‐
tency (linearizability) and total availability. When a network fault occurs, you have to
choose between either linearizability or total availability. Thus, a better way of phras‐
ing CAP would be either Consistent or Available when Partitioned  [39]. A more relia‐
ble network needs to make this choice less often, but at some point the choice is
inevitable.
In discussions of CAP there are several contradictory definitions of the term availa‐
bility, and the formalization as a theorem [30] does not match its usual meaning [40].
Many so-called “highly available” (fault-tolerant) systems actually do not meet CAP’s
idiosyncratic definition of availability. All in all, there is a lot of misunderstanding
and confusion around CAP, and it does not help us understand systems better, so
CAP is best avoided.
The CAP theorem as formally defined [ 30] is of very narrow scope: it only considers
one consistency model (namely linearizability) and one kind of fault ( network parti‐
tions,vi or nodes that are alive but disconnected from each other). It doesn’t say any‐
Linearizability | 337

thing about network delays, dead nodes, or other trade-offs. Thus, although CAP has
been historically influential, it has little practical value for designing systems [9, 40].
There are many more interesting impossibility results in distributed systems [ 41],
and CAP has now been superseded by more precise results [ 2, 42], so it is of mostly
historical interest today. 
Linearizability and network delays
Although linearizability is a useful guarantee, surprisingly few systems are actually
linearizable in practice. For example, even RAM on a modern multi-core CPU is not
linearizable [43]: if a thread running on one CPU core writes to a memory address,
and a thread on another CPU core reads the same address shortly afterward, it is not
guaranteed to read the value written by the first thread (unless a memory barrier or
fence [44] is used).
The reason for this behavior is that every CPU core has its own memory cache and
store buffer. Memory access first goes to the cache by default, and any changes are
asynchronously written out to main memory. Since accessing data in the cache is
much faster than going to main memory [ 45], this feature is essential for good per‐
formance on modern CPUs. However, there are now several copies of the data (one
in main memory, and perhaps several more in various caches), and these copies are
asynchronously updated, so linearizability is lost.
Why make this trade-off? It makes no sense to use the CAP theorem to justify the
multi-core memory consistency model: within one computer we usually assume reli‐
able communication, and we don’t expect one CPU core to be able to continue oper‐
ating normally if it is disconnected from the rest of the computer. The reason for
dropping linearizability is performance, not fault tolerance.
The same is true of many distributed databases that choose not to provide lineariza‐
ble guarantees: they do so primarily to increase performance, not so much for fault
tolerance [46]. Linearizability is slow—and this is true all the time, not only during a
network fault.
Can’t we maybe find a more efficient implementation of linearizable storage? It
seems the answer is no: Attiya and Welch [ 47] prove that if you want linearizability,
the response time of read and write requests is at least proportional to the uncertainty
of delays in the network. In a network with highly variable delays, like most com‐
puter networks (see “Timeouts and Unbounded Delays” on page 281), the response
time of linearizable reads and writes is inevitably going to be high. A faster algorithm
for linearizability does not exist, but weaker consistency models can be much faster,
so this trade-off is important for latency-sensitive systems. In Chapter 12 we will dis‐
cuss some approaches for avoiding linearizability without sacrificing correctness. 
338 | Chapter 9: Consistency and Consensus

Ordering Guarantees
We said previously that a linearizable register behaves as if there is only a single copy
of the data, and that every operation appears to take effect atomically at one point in
time. This definition implies that operations are executed in some well-defined order.
We illustrated the ordering in Figure 9-4 by joining up the operations in the order in
which they seem to have executed.
Ordering has been a recurring theme in this book, which suggests that it might be an
important fundamental idea. Let’s briefly recap some of the other contexts in which
we have discussed ordering:
• In Chapter 5 we saw that the main purpose of the leader in single-leader replica‐
tion is to determine the order of writes in the replication log—that is, the order in
which followers apply those writes. If there is no single leader, conflicts can occur
due to concurrent operations (see “Handling Write Conflicts” on page 171 ).
• Serializability, which we discussed in Chapter 7, is about ensuring that transac‐
tions behave as if they were executed in some sequential order. It can be achieved
by literally executing transactions in that serial order, or by allowing concurrent
execution while preventing serialization conflicts (by locking or aborting).
• The use of timestamps and clocks in distributed systems that we discussed in
Chapter 8  (see “Relying on Synchronized Clocks” on page 291) is another
attempt to introduce order into a disorderly world, for example to determine
which one of two writes happened later.
It turns out that there are deep connections between ordering, linearizability, and
consensus. Although this notion is a bit more theoretical and abstract than the rest of
this book, it is very helpful for clarifying our understanding of what systems can and
cannot do. We will explore this topic in the next few sections.
Ordering and Causality
There are several reasons why ordering keeps coming up, and one of the reasons is
that it helps preserve causality. We have already seen several examples over the
course of this book where causality has been important:
• In “Consistent Prefix Reads” on page 165 (Figure 5-5) we saw an example where
the observer of a conversation saw first the answer to a question, and then the
question being answered. This is confusing because it violates our intuition of
cause and effect: if a question is answered, then clearly the question had to be
there first, because the person giving the answer must have seen the question
(assuming they are not psychic and cannot see into the future). We say that there
is a causal dependency between the question and the answer.
Ordering Guarantees | 339

• A similar pattern appeared in Figure 5-9 , where we looked at the replication
between three leaders and noticed that some writes could “overtake” others due
to network delays. From the perspective of one of the replicas it would look as
though there was an update to a row that did not exist. Causality here means that
a row must first be created before it can be updated.
• In “Detecting Concurrent Writes” on page 184 we observed that if you have two
operations A and B, there are three possibilities: either A happened before B, or B
happened before A, or A and B are concurrent. This happened before relationship
is another expression of causality: if A happened before B, that means B might
have known about A, or built upon A, or depended on A. If A and B are concur‐
rent, there is no causal link between them; in other words, we are sure that nei‐
ther knew about the other.
• In the context of snapshot isolation for transactions ( “Snapshot Isolation and
Repeatable Read” on page 237 ), we said that a transaction reads from a consistent
snapshot. But what does “consistent” mean in this context? It means consistent
with causality: if the snapshot contains an answer, it must also contain the ques‐
tion being answered [ 48]. Observing the entire database at a single point in time
makes it consistent with causality: the effects of all operations that happened cau‐
sally before that point in time are visible, but no operations that happened cau‐
sally afterward can be seen. Read skew (non-repeatable reads, as illustrated in
Figure 7-6) means reading data in a state that violates causality.
• Our examples of write skew between transactions (see “Write Skew and Phan‐
toms”  on page 246) also demonstrated causal dependencies: in Figure 7-8, Alice
was allowed to go off call because the transaction thought that Bob was still on
call, and vice versa. In this case, the action of going off call is causally dependent
on the observation of who is currently on call. Serializable snapshot isolation (see
“Serializable Snapshot Isolation (SSI)” on page 261) detects write skew by track‐
ing the causal dependencies between transactions.
• In the example of Alice and Bob watching football ( Figure 9-1), the fact that Bob
got a stale result from the server after hearing Alice exclaim the result is a causal‐
ity violation: Alice’s exclamation is causally dependent on the announcement of
the score, so Bob should also be able to see the score after hearing Alice. The
same pattern appeared again in “Cross-channel timing dependencies” on page
331 in the guise of an image resizing service.
Causality imposes an ordering on events: cause comes before effect; a message is sent
before that message is received; the question comes before the answer. And, like in
real life, one thing leads to another: one node reads some data and then writes some‐
thing as a result, another node reads the thing that was written and writes something
else in turn, and so on. These chains of causally dependent operations define the
causal order in the system—i.e., what happened before what.
340 | Chapter 9: Consistency and Consensus

If a system obeys the ordering imposed by causality, we say that it is causally consis‐
tent. For example, snapshot isolation provides causal consistency: when you read
from the database, and you see some piece of data, then you must also be able to see
any data that causally precedes it (assuming it has not been deleted in the meantime).
The causal order is not a total order
A total order allows any two elements to be compared, so if you have two elements,
you can always say which one is greater and which one is smaller. For example, natu‐
ral numbers are totally ordered: if I give you any two numbers, say 5 and 13, you can
tell me that 13 is greater than 5.
However, mathematical sets are not totally ordered: is { a, b} greater than {b, c}? Well,
you can’t really compare them, because neither is a subset of the other. We say they
are incomparable, and therefore mathematical sets are partially ordered: in some cases
one set is greater than another (if one set contains all the elements of another), but in
other cases they are incomparable.
The difference between a total order and a partial order is reflected in different data‐
base consistency models:
Linearizability
In a linearizable system, we have a total order of operations: if the system behaves
as if there is only a single copy of the data, and every operation is atomic, this
means that for any two operations we can always say which one happened first.
This total ordering is illustrated as a timeline in Figure 9-4.
Causality
We said that two operations are concurrent if neither happened before the other
(see “The “happens-before” relationship and concurrency” on page 186). Put
another way, two events are ordered if they are causally related (one happened
before the other), but they are incomparable if they are concurrent. This means
that causality defines a partial order , not a total order: some operations are
ordered with respect to each other, but some are incomparable.
Therefore, according to this definition, there are no concurrent operations in a line‐
arizable datastore: there must be a single timeline along which all operations are
totally ordered. There might be several requests waiting to be handled, but the data‐
store ensures that every request is handled atomically at a single point in time, acting
on a single copy of the data, along a single timeline, without any concurrency.
Concurrency would mean that the timeline branches and merges again—and in this
case, operations on different branches are incomparable (i.e., concurrent). We saw
this phenomenon in Chapter 5: for example, Figure 5-14 is not a straight-line total
order, but rather a jumble of different operations going on concurrently. The arrows
in the diagram indicate causal dependencies—the partial ordering of operations.
Ordering Guarantees | 341

If you are familiar with distributed version control systems such as Git, their version
histories are very much like the graph of causal dependencies. Often one commit
happens after another, in a straight line, but sometimes you get branches (when sev‐
eral people concurrently work on a project), and merges are created when those con‐
currently created commits are combined.
Linearizability is stronger than causal consistency
So what is the relationship between the causal order and linearizability? The answer is
that linearizability implies causality: any system that is linearizable will preserve cau‐
sality correctly [ 7]. In particular, if there are multiple communication channels in a
system (such as the message queue and the file storage service in Figure 9-5), lineariz‐
ability ensures that causality is automatically preserved without the system having to
do anything special (such as passing around timestamps between different compo‐
nents).
The fact that linearizability ensures causality is what makes linearizable systems sim‐
ple to understand and appealing. However, as discussed in “The Cost of Linearizabil‐
ity”  on page 335, making a system linearizable can harm its performance and
availability, especially if the system has significant network delays (for example, if it’s
geographically distributed). For this reason, some distributed data systems have
abandoned linearizability, which allows them to achieve better performance but can
make them difficult to work with.
The good news is that a middle ground is possible. Linearizability is not the only way
of preserving causality—there are other ways too. A system can be causally consistent
without incurring the performance hit of making it linearizable (in particular, the
CAP theorem does not apply). In fact, causal consistency is the strongest possible
consistency model that does not slow down due to network delays, and remains
available in the face of network failures [2, 42].
In many cases, systems that appear to require linearizability in fact only really require
causal consistency, which can be implemented more efficiently. Based on this obser‐
vation, researchers are exploring new kinds of databases that preserve causality, with
performance and availability characteristics that are similar to those of eventually
consistent systems [49, 50, 51].
As this research is quite recent, not much of it has yet made its way into production
systems, and there are still challenges to be overcome [ 52, 53]. However, it is a prom‐
ising direction for future systems.
Capturing causal dependencies
We won’t go into all the nitty-gritty details of how nonlinearizable systems can main‐
tain causal consistency here, but just briefly explore some of the key ideas.
342 | Chapter 9: Consistency and Consensus

In order to maintain causality, you need to know which operation happened before
which other operation. This is a partial order: concurrent operations may be pro‐
cessed in any order, but if one operation happened before another, then they must be
processed in that order on every replica. Thus, when a replica processes an operation,
it must ensure that all causally preceding operations (all operations that happened
before) have already been processed; if some preceding operation is missing, the later
operation must wait until the preceding operation has been processed.
In order to determine causal dependencies, we need some way of describing the
“knowledge” of a node in the system. If a node had already seen the value X when it
issued the write Y, then X and Y may be causally related. The analysis uses the kinds
of questions you would expect in a criminal investigation of fraud charges: did the
CEO know about X at the time when they made decision Y?
The techniques for determining which operation happened before which other oper‐
ation are similar to what we discussed in “Detecting Concurrent Writes” on page 184 .
That section discussed causality in a leaderless datastore, where we need to detect
concurrent writes to the same key in order to prevent lost updates. Causal consis‐
tency goes further: it needs to track causal dependencies across the entire database,
not just for a single key. Version vectors can be generalized to do this [54].
In order to determine the causal ordering, the database needs to know which version
of the data was read by the application. This is why, in Figure 5-13, the version num‐
ber from the prior operation is passed back to the database on a write. A similar idea
appears in the conflict detection of SSI, as discussed in “Serializable Snapshot Isola‐
tion (SSI)” on page 261: when a transaction wants to commit, the database checks
whether the version of the data that it read is still up to date. To this end, the database
keeps track of which data has been read by which transaction. 
Sequence Number Ordering
Although causality is an important theoretical concept, actually keeping track of all
causal dependencies can become impractical. In many applications, clients read lots
of data before writing something, and then it is not clear whether the write is causally
dependent on all or only some of those prior reads. Explicitly tracking all the data
that has been read would mean a large overhead.
However, there is a better way: we can use sequence numbers or timestamps to order
events. A timestamp need not come from a time-of-day clock (or physical clock,
which have many problems, as discussed in “Unreliable Clocks”  on page 287). It can
instead come from a logical clock , which is an algorithm to generate a sequence of
numbers to identify operations, typically using counters that are incremented for
every operation.
Ordering Guarantees | 343

vii. A total order that is inconsistent with causality is easy to create, but not very useful. For example, you can
generate a random UUID for each operation, and compare UUIDs lexicographically to define the total order‐
ing of operations. This is a valid total order, but the random UUIDs tell you nothing about which operation
actually happened first, or whether the operations were concurrent.
Such sequence numbers or timestamps are compact (only a few bytes in size), and
they provide a total order: that is, every operation has a unique sequence number, and
you can always compare two sequence numbers to determine which is greater (i.e.,
which operation happened later).
In particular, we can create sequence numbers in a total order that is consistent with
causality:vii we promise that if operation A causally happened before B, then A occurs
before B in the total order (A has a lower sequence number than B). Concurrent
operations may be ordered arbitrarily. Such a total order captures all the causality
information, but also imposes more ordering than strictly required by causality.
In a database with single-leader replication (see “Leaders and Followers” on page
152), the replication log defines a total order of write operations that is consistent
with causality. The leader can simply increment a counter for each operation, and
thus assign a monotonically increasing sequence number to each operation in the
replication log. If a follower applies the writes in the order they appear in the replica‐
tion log, the state of the follower is always causally consistent (even if it is lagging
behind the leader).
Noncausal sequence number generators
If there is not a single leader (perhaps because you are using a multi-leader or leader‐
less database, or because the database is partitioned), it is less clear how to generate
sequence numbers for operations. Various methods are used in practice:
• Each node can generate its own independent set of sequence numbers. For exam‐
ple, if you have two nodes, one node can generate only odd numbers and the
other only even numbers. In general, you could reserve some bits in the binary
representation of the sequence number to contain a unique node identifier, and
this would ensure that two different nodes can never generate the same sequence
number.
• You can attach a timestamp from a time-of-day clock (physical clock) to each
operation [55]. Such timestamps are not sequential, but if they have sufficiently
high resolution, they might be sufficient to totally order operations. This fact is
used in the last write wins conflict resolution method (see “Timestamps for
ordering events” on page 291 ).
• You can preallocate blocks of sequence numbers. For example, node A might
claim the block of sequence numbers from 1 to 1,000, and node B might claim
344 | Chapter 9: Consistency and Consensus

viii. It is possible to make physical clock timestamps consistent with causality: in “Synchronized clocks for
global snapshots” on page 294  we discussed Google’s Spanner, which estimates the expected clock skew and
waits out the uncertainty interval before committing a write. This method ensures that a causally later trans‐
action is given a greater timestamp. However, most clocks cannot provide the required uncertainty metric.
the block from 1,001 to 2,000. Then each node can independently assign
sequence numbers from its block, and allocate a new block when its supply of
sequence numbers begins to run low.
These three options all perform better and are more scalable than pushing all opera‐
tions through a single leader that increments a counter. They generate a unique,
approximately increasing sequence number for each operation. However, they all
have a problem: the sequence numbers they generate are not consistent with causality.
The causality problems occur because these sequence number generators do not cor‐
rectly capture the ordering of operations across different nodes:
• Each node may process a different number of operations per second. Thus, if one
node generates even numbers and the other generates odd numbers, the counter
for even numbers may lag behind the counter for odd numbers, or vice versa. If
you have an odd-numbered operation and an even-numbered operation, you
cannot accurately tell which one causally happened first.
• Timestamps from physical clocks are subject to clock skew, which can make
them inconsistent with causality. For example, see Figure 8-3, which shows a sce‐
nario in which an operation that happened causally later was actually assigned a
lower timestamp.viii
• In the case of the block allocator, one operation may be given a sequence number
in the range from 1,001 to 2,000, and a causally later operation may be given a
number in the range from 1 to 1,000. Here, again, the sequence number is incon‐
sistent with causality.
Lamport timestamps
Although the three sequence number generators just described are inconsistent with
causality, there is actually a simple method for generating sequence numbers that is
consistent with causality. It is called a Lamport timestamp, proposed in 1978 by Leslie
Lamport [56], in what is now one of the most-cited papers in the field of distributed
systems.
The use of Lamport timestamps is illustrated in Figure 9-8. Each node has a unique
identifier, and each node keeps a counter of the number of operations it has pro‐
cessed. The Lamport timestamp is then simply a pair of ( counter, node ID ). Two
Ordering Guarantees | 345

nodes may sometimes have the same counter value, but by including the node ID in
the timestamp, each timestamp is made unique.
Figure 9-8. Lamport timestamps provide a total ordering consistent with causality.
A Lamport timestamp bears no relationship to a physical time-of-day clock, but it
provides total ordering: if you have two timestamps, the one with a greater counter
value is the greater timestamp; if the counter values are the same, the one with the
greater node ID is the greater timestamp.
So far this description is essentially the same as the even/odd counters described in
the last section. The key idea about Lamport timestamps, which makes them consis‐
tent with causality, is the following: every node and every client keeps track of the
maximum counter value it has seen so far, and includes that maximum on every
request. When a node receives a request or response with a maximum counter value
greater than its own counter value, it immediately increases its own counter to that
maximum.
This is shown in Figure 9-8, where client A receives a counter value of 5 from node 2,
and then sends that maximum of 5 to node 1. At that time, node 1’s counter was only
1, but it was immediately moved forward to 5, so the next operation had an incre‐
mented counter value of 6.
As long as the maximum counter value is carried along with every operation, this
scheme ensures that the ordering from the Lamport timestamps is consistent with
causality, because every causal dependency results in an increased timestamp.
Lamport timestamps are sometimes confused with version vectors, which we saw in
“Detecting Concurrent Writes” on page 184. Although there are some similarities,
they have a different purpose: version vectors can distinguish whether two operations
are concurrent or whether one is causally dependent on the other, whereas Lamport
timestamps always enforce a total ordering. From the total ordering of Lamport time‐
346 | Chapter 9: Consistency and Consensus